
Who that cares much to know the history of man, and how the mysterious
mixture behaves under the varying experiments of Time, has not dwelt,
at least briefly, on the life of Saint Theresa, has not smiled with
some gentleness at the thought of the little girl walking forth one
morning hand-in-hand with her still smaller brother, to go and seek
martyrdom in the country of the Moors?  Out they toddled from rugged
Avila, wide-eyed and helpless-looking as two fawns, but with human
hearts, already beating to a national idea; until domestic reality met
them in the shape of uncles, and turned them back from their great
resolve.  That child-pilgrimage was a fit beginning.  Theresa's
passionate, ideal nature demanded an epic life: what were many-volumed
romances of chivalry and the social conquests of a brilliant girl to
her?  Her flame quickly burned up that light fuel; and, fed from
within, soared after some illimitable satisfaction, some object which
would never justify weariness, which would reconcile self-despair with
the rapturous consciousness of life beyond self.  She found her epos in
the reform of a religious order.

That Spanish woman who lived three hundred years ago, was certainly not
the last of her kind.  Many Theresas have been born who found for
themselves no epic life wherein there was a constant unfolding of
far-resonant action; perhaps only a life of mistakes, the offspring of
a certain spiritual grandeur ill-matched with the meanness of
opportunity; perhaps a tragic failure which found no sacred poet and
sank unwept into oblivion.  With dim lights and tangled circumstance
they tried to shape their thought and deed in noble agreement; but
after all, to common eyes their struggles seemed mere inconsistency and
formlessness; for these later-born Theresas were helped by no coherent
social faith and order which could perform the function of knowledge
for the ardently willing soul.  Their ardor alternated between a vague
ideal and the common yearning of womanhood; so that the one was
disapproved as extravagance, and the other condemned as a lapse.

Some have felt that these blundering lives are due to the inconvenient
indefiniteness with which the Supreme Power has fashioned the natures
of women: if there were one level of feminine incompetence as strict as
the ability to count three and no more, the social lot of women might
be treated with scientific certitude.  Meanwhile the indefiniteness
remains, and the limits of variation are really much wider than any one
would imagine from the sameness of women's coiffure and the favorite
love-stories in prose and verse.  Here and there a cygnet is reared
uneasily among the ducklings in the brown pond, and never finds the
living stream in fellowship with its own oary-footed kind.  Here and
there is born a Saint Theresa, foundress of nothing, whose loving
heart-beats and sobs after an unattained goodness tremble off and are
dispersed among hindrances, instead of centring in some
long-recognizable deed.





BOOK I.

MISS BROOKE.



CHAPTER I.

    "Since I can do no good because a woman,
     Reach constantly at something that is near it.
          --The Maid's Tragedy:  BEAUMONT AND FLETCHER.


Miss Brooke had that kind of beauty which seems to be thrown into
relief by poor dress.  Her hand and wrist were so finely formed that
she could wear sleeves not less bare of style than those in which the
Blessed Virgin appeared to Italian painters; and her profile as well as
her stature and bearing seemed to gain the more dignity from her plain
garments, which by the side of provincial fashion gave her the
impressiveness of a fine quotation from the Bible,--or from one of our
elder poets,--in a paragraph of to-day's newspaper.  She was usually
spoken of as being remarkably clever, but with the addition that her
sister Celia had more common-sense. Nevertheless, Celia wore scarcely
more trimmings; and it was only to close observers that her dress
differed from her sister's, and had a shade of coquetry in its
arrangements; for Miss Brooke's plain dressing was due to mixed
conditions, in most of which her sister shared.  The pride of being
ladies had something to do with it: the Brooke connections, though not
exactly aristocratic, were unquestionably "good:" if you inquired
backward for a generation or two, you would not find any yard-measuring
or parcel-tying forefathers--anything lower than an admiral or a
clergyman; and there was even an ancestor discernible as a Puritan
gentleman who served under Cromwell, but afterwards conformed, and
managed to come out of all political troubles as the proprietor of a
respectable family estate.  Young women of such birth, living in a
quiet country-house, and attending a village church hardly larger than
a parlor, naturally regarded frippery as the ambition of a huckster's
daughter.  Then there was well-bred economy, which in those days made
show in dress the first item to be deducted from, when any margin was
required for expenses more distinctive of rank.  Such reasons would
have been enough to account for plain dress, quite apart from religious
feeling; but in Miss Brooke's case, religion alone would have
determined it; and Celia mildly acquiesced in all her sister's
sentiments, only infusing them with that common-sense which is able to
accept momentous doctrines without any eccentric agitation.  Dorothea
knew many passages of Pascal's Pensees and of Jeremy Taylor by heart;
and to her the destinies of mankind, seen by the light of Christianity,
made the solicitudes of feminine fashion appear an occupation for
Bedlam.  She could not reconcile the anxieties of a spiritual life
involving eternal consequences, with a keen interest in gimp and
artificial protrusions of drapery.  Her mind was theoretic, and yearned
by its nature after some lofty conception of the world which might
frankly include the parish of Tipton and her own rule of conduct there;
she was enamoured of intensity and greatness, and rash in embracing
whatever seemed to her to have those aspects; likely to seek martyrdom,
to make retractations, and then to incur martyrdom after all in a
quarter where she had not sought it.  Certainly such elements in the
character of a marriageable girl tended to interfere with her lot, and
hinder it from being decided according to custom, by good looks,
vanity, and merely canine affection.  With all this, she, the elder of
the sisters, was not yet twenty, and they had both been educated, since
they were about twelve years old and had lost their parents, on plans
at once narrow and promiscuous, first in an English family and
afterwards in a Swiss family at Lausanne, their bachelor uncle and
guardian trying in this way to remedy the disadvantages of their
orphaned condition.

It was hardly a year since they had come to live at Tipton Grange with
their uncle, a man nearly sixty, of acquiescent temper, miscellaneous
opinions, and uncertain vote.  He had travelled in his younger years,
and was held in this part of the county to have contracted a too
rambling habit of mind.  Mr. Brooke's conclusions were as difficult to
predict as the weather: it was only safe to say that he would act with
benevolent intentions, and that he would spend as little money as
possible in carrying them out.  For the most glutinously indefinite
minds enclose some hard grains of habit; and a man has been seen lax
about all his own interests except the retention of his snuff-box,
concerning which he was watchful, suspicious, and greedy of clutch.

In Mr. Brooke the hereditary strain of Puritan energy was clearly in
abeyance; but in his niece Dorothea it glowed alike through faults and
virtues, turning sometimes into impatience of her uncle's talk or his
way of "letting things be" on his estate, and making her long all the
more for the time when she would be of age and have some command of
money for generous schemes.  She was regarded as an heiress; for not
only had the sisters seven hundred a-year each from their parents, but
if Dorothea married and had a son, that son would inherit Mr. Brooke's
estate, presumably worth about three thousand a-year--a rental which
seemed wealth to provincial families, still discussing Mr. Peel's late
conduct on the Catholic question, innocent of future gold-fields, and
of that gorgeous plutocracy which has so nobly exalted the necessities
of genteel life.

And how should Dorothea not marry?--a girl so handsome and with such
prospects?  Nothing could hinder it but her love of extremes, and her
insistence on regulating life according to notions which might cause a
wary man to hesitate before he made her an offer, or even might lead
her at last to refuse all offers.  A young lady of some birth and
fortune, who knelt suddenly down on a brick floor by the side of a sick
laborer and prayed fervidly as if she thought herself living in the
time of the Apostles--who had strange whims of fasting like a Papist,
and of sitting up at night to read old theological books!  Such a wife
might awaken you some fine morning with a new scheme for the
application of her income which would interfere with political economy
and the keeping of saddle-horses: a man would naturally think twice
before he risked himself in such fellowship.  Women were expected to
have weak opinions; but the great safeguard of society and of domestic
life was, that opinions were not acted on.  Sane people did what their
neighbors did, so that if any lunatics were at large, one might know
and avoid them.

The rural opinion about the new young ladies, even among the cottagers,
was generally in favor of Celia, as being so amiable and
innocent-looking, while Miss Brooke's large eyes seemed, like her
religion, too unusual and striking.  Poor Dorothea! compared with her,
the innocent-looking Celia was knowing and worldly-wise; so much
subtler is a human mind than the outside tissues which make a sort of
blazonry or clock-face for it.

Yet those who approached Dorothea, though prejudiced against her by
this alarming hearsay, found that she had a charm unaccountably
reconcilable with it.  Most men thought her bewitching when she was on
horseback.  She loved the fresh air and the various aspects of the
country, and when her eyes and cheeks glowed with mingled pleasure she
looked very little like a devotee.  Riding was an indulgence which she
allowed herself in spite of conscientious qualms; she felt that she
enjoyed it in a pagan sensuous way, and always looked forward to
renouncing it.

She was open, ardent, and not in the least self-admiring; indeed, it
was pretty to see how her imagination adorned her sister Celia with
attractions altogether superior to her own, and if any gentleman
appeared to come to the Grange from some other motive than that of
seeing Mr. Brooke, she concluded that he must be in love with Celia:
Sir James Chettam, for example, whom she constantly considered from
Celia's point of view, inwardly debating whether it would be good for
Celia to accept him.  That he should be regarded as a suitor to herself
would have seemed to her a ridiculous irrelevance.  Dorothea, with all
her eagerness to know the truths of life, retained very childlike ideas
about marriage.  She felt sure that she would have accepted the
judicious Hooker, if she had been born in time to save him from that
wretched mistake he made in matrimony; or John Milton when his
blindness had come on; or any of the other great men whose odd habits
it would have been glorious piety to endure; but an amiable handsome
baronet, who said "Exactly" to her remarks even when she expressed
uncertainty,--how could he affect her as a lover?  The really
delightful marriage must be that where your husband was a sort of
father, and could teach you even Hebrew, if you wished it.

These peculiarities of Dorothea's character caused Mr. Brooke to be all
the more blamed in neighboring families for not securing some
middle-aged lady as guide and companion to his nieces.  But he himself
dreaded so much the sort of superior woman likely to be available for
such a position, that he allowed himself to be dissuaded by Dorothea's
objections, and was in this case brave enough to defy the world--that
is to say, Mrs. Cadwallader the Rector's wife, and the small group of
gentry with whom he visited in the northeast corner of Loamshire.  So
Miss Brooke presided in her uncle's household, and did not at all
dislike her new authority, with the homage that belonged to it.

Sir James Chettam was going to dine at the Grange to-day with another
gentleman whom the girls had never seen, and about whom Dorothea felt
some venerating expectation.  This was the Reverend Edward Casaubon,
noted in the county as a man of profound learning, understood for many
years to be engaged on a great work concerning religious history; also
as a man of wealth enough to give lustre to his piety, and having views
of his own which were to be more clearly ascertained on the publication
of his book.  His very name carried an impressiveness hardly to be
measured without a precise chronology of scholarship.

Early in the day Dorothea had returned from the infant school which she
had set going in the village, and was taking her usual place in the
pretty sitting-room which divided the bedrooms of the sisters, bent on
finishing a plan for some buildings (a kind of work which she delighted
in), when Celia, who had been watching her with a hesitating desire to
propose something, said--

"Dorothea, dear, if you don't mind--if you are not very busy--suppose
we looked at mamma's jewels to-day, and divided them?  It is exactly
six months to-day since uncle gave them to you, and you have not looked
at them yet."

Celia's face had the shadow of a pouting expression in it, the full
presence of the pout being kept back by an habitual awe of Dorothea and
principle; two associated facts which might show a mysterious
electricity if you touched them incautiously.  To her relief,
Dorothea's eyes were full of laughter as she looked up.

"What a wonderful little almanac you are, Celia!  Is it six calendar or
six lunar months?"

"It is the last day of September now, and it was the first of April
when uncle gave them to you.  You know, he said that he had forgotten
them till then.  I believe you have never thought of them since you
locked them up in the cabinet here."

"Well, dear, we should never wear them, you know." Dorothea spoke in a
full cordial tone, half caressing, half explanatory.  She had her
pencil in her hand, and was making tiny side-plans on a margin.

Celia colored, and looked very grave.  "I think, dear, we are wanting
in respect to mamma's memory, to put them by and take no notice of
them.  And," she added, after hesitating a little, with a rising sob of
mortification, "necklaces are quite usual now; and Madame Poincon, who
was stricter in some things even than you are, used to wear ornaments.
And Christians generally--surely there are women in heaven now who wore
jewels." Celia was conscious of some mental strength when she really
applied herself to argument.

"You would like to wear them?" exclaimed Dorothea, an air of astonished
discovery animating her whole person with a dramatic action which she
had caught from that very Madame Poincon who wore the ornaments.  "Of
course, then, let us have them out.  Why did you not tell me before?
But the keys, the keys!" She pressed her hands against the sides of her
head and seemed to despair of her memory.

"They are here," said Celia, with whom this explanation had been long
meditated and prearranged.

"Pray open the large drawer of the cabinet and get out the jewel-box."

The casket was soon open before them, and the various jewels spread
out, making a bright parterre on the table.  It was no great
collection, but a few of the ornaments were really of remarkable
beauty, the finest that was obvious at first being a necklace of purple
amethysts set in exquisite gold work, and a pearl cross with five
brilliants in it.  Dorothea immediately took up the necklace and
fastened it round her sister's neck, where it fitted almost as closely
as a bracelet; but the circle suited the Henrietta-Maria style of
Celia's head and neck, and she could see that it did, in the pier-glass
opposite.

"There, Celia! you can wear that with your Indian muslin.  But this
cross you must wear with your dark dresses."

Celia was trying not to smile with pleasure.  "O Dodo, you must keep
the cross yourself."

"No, no, dear, no," said Dorothea, putting up her hand with careless
deprecation.

"Yes, indeed you must; it would suit you--in your black dress, now,"
said Celia, insistingly.  "You _might_ wear that."

"Not for the world, not for the world.  A cross is the last thing I
would wear as a trinket." Dorothea shuddered slightly.

"Then you will think it wicked in me to wear it," said Celia, uneasily.

"No, dear, no," said Dorothea, stroking her sister's cheek.  "Souls
have complexions too: what will suit one will not suit another."

"But you might like to keep it for mamma's sake."

"No, I have other things of mamma's--her sandal-wood box which I am so
fond of--plenty of things.  In fact, they are all yours, dear.  We need
discuss them no longer.  There--take away your property."

Celia felt a little hurt.  There was a strong assumption of superiority
in this Puritanic toleration, hardly less trying to the blond flesh of
an unenthusiastic sister than a Puritanic persecution.

"But how can I wear ornaments if you, who are the elder sister, will
never wear them?"

"Nay, Celia, that is too much to ask, that I should wear trinkets to
keep you in countenance.  If I were to put on such a necklace as that,
I should feel as if I had been pirouetting.  The world would go round
with me, and I should not know how to walk."

Celia had unclasped the necklace and drawn it off.  "It would be a
little tight for your neck; something to lie down and hang would suit
you better," she said, with some satisfaction.  The complete unfitness
of the necklace from all points of view for Dorothea, made Celia
happier in taking it.  She was opening some ring-boxes, which disclosed
a fine emerald with diamonds, and just then the sun passing beyond a
cloud sent a bright gleam over the table.

"How very beautiful these gems are!" said Dorothea, under a new current
of feeling, as sudden as the gleam.  "It is strange how deeply colors
seem to penetrate one, like scent.  I suppose that is the reason why
gems are used as spiritual emblems in the Revelation of St. John.  They
look like fragments of heaven.  I think that emerald is more beautiful
than any of them."

"And there is a bracelet to match it," said Celia.  "We did not notice
this at first."

"They are lovely," said Dorothea, slipping the ring and bracelet on her
finely turned finger and wrist, and holding them towards the window on
a level with her eyes.  All the while her thought was trying to justify
her delight in the colors by merging them in her mystic religious joy.

"You _would_ like those, Dorothea," said Celia, rather falteringly,
beginning to think with wonder that her sister showed some weakness,
and also that emeralds would suit her own complexion even better than
purple amethysts.  "You must keep that ring and bracelet--if nothing
else.  But see, these agates are very pretty and quiet."

"Yes!  I will keep these--this ring and bracelet," said Dorothea.
Then, letting her hand fall on the table, she said in another
tone--"Yet what miserable men find such things, and work at them, and
sell them!" She paused again, and Celia thought that her sister was
going to renounce the ornaments, as in consistency she ought to do.

"Yes, dear, I will keep these," said Dorothea, decidedly.  "But take
all the rest away, and the casket."

She took up her pencil without removing the jewels, and still looking
at them.  She thought of often having them by her, to feed her eye at
these little fountains of pure color.

"Shall you wear them in company?" said Celia, who was watching her with
real curiosity as to what she would do.

Dorothea glanced quickly at her sister.  Across all her imaginative
adornment of those whom she loved, there darted now and then a keen
discernment, which was not without a scorching quality.  If Miss Brooke
ever attained perfect meekness, it would not be for lack of inward fire.

"Perhaps," she said, rather haughtily.  "I cannot tell to what level I
may sink."

Celia blushed, and was unhappy: she saw that she had offended her
sister, and dared not say even anything pretty about the gift of the
ornaments which she put back into the box and carried away.  Dorothea
too was unhappy, as she went on with her plan-drawing, questioning the
purity of her own feeling and speech in the scene which had ended with
that little explosion.

Celia's consciousness told her that she had not been at all in the
wrong: it was quite natural and justifiable that she should have asked
that question, and she repeated to herself that Dorothea was
inconsistent: either she should have taken her full share of the
jewels, or, after what she had said, she should have renounced them
altogether.

"I am sure--at least, I trust," thought Celia, "that the wearing of a
necklace will not interfere with my prayers.  And I do not see that I
should be bound by Dorothea's opinions now we are going into society,
though of course she herself ought to be bound by them.  But Dorothea
is not always consistent."

Thus Celia, mutely bending over her tapestry, until she heard her
sister calling her.

"Here, Kitty, come and look at my plan; I shall think I am a great
architect, if I have not got incompatible stairs and fireplaces."

As Celia bent over the paper, Dorothea put her cheek against her
sister's arm caressingly.  Celia understood the action.  Dorothea saw
that she had been in the wrong, and Celia pardoned her.  Since they
could remember, there had been a mixture of criticism and awe in the
attitude of Celia's mind towards her elder sister.  The younger had
always worn a yoke; but is there any yoked creature without its private
opinions?



CHAPTER II.

    "'Dime; no ves aquel caballero que hacia nosotros viene
    sobre un caballo rucio rodado que trae puesto en la cabeza
    un yelmo de oro?' 'Lo que veo y columbro,' respondio Sancho,
    'no es sino un hombre sobre un as no pardo como el mio, que
    trae sobre la cabeza una cosa que relumbra.' 'Pues ese es el
    yelmo de Mambrino,' dijo Don Quijote."--CERVANTES.

    "'Seest thou not yon cavalier who cometh toward us on a
    dapple-gray steed, and weareth a golden helmet?' 'What I
    see,' answered Sancho, 'is nothing but a man on a gray ass
    like my own, who carries something shiny on his head.' 'Just
    so,' answered Don Quixote: 'and that resplendent object is
    the helmet of Mambrino.'"


"Sir Humphry Davy?" said Mr. Brooke, over the soup, in his easy smiling
way, taking up Sir James Chettam's remark that he was studying Davy's
Agricultural Chemistry.  "Well, now, Sir Humphry Davy; I dined with him
years ago at Cartwright's, and Wordsworth was there too--the poet
Wordsworth, you know.  Now there was something singular.  I was at
Cambridge when Wordsworth was there, and I never met him--and I dined
with him twenty years afterwards at Cartwright's. There's an oddity in
things, now.  But Davy was there: he was a poet too.  Or, as I may say,
Wordsworth was poet one, and Davy was poet two.  That was true in every
sense, you know."

Dorothea felt a little more uneasy than usual.  In the beginning of
dinner, the party being small and the room still, these motes from the
mass of a magistrate's mind fell too noticeably.  She wondered how a
man like Mr. Casaubon would support such triviality.  His manners, she
thought, were very dignified; the set of his iron-gray hair and his
deep eye-sockets made him resemble the portrait of Locke.  He had the
spare form and the pale complexion which became a student; as different
as possible from the blooming Englishman of the red-whiskered type
represented by Sir James Chettam.

"I am reading the Agricultural Chemistry," said this excellent baronet,
"because I am going to take one of the farms into my own hands, and see
if something cannot be done in setting a good pattern of farming among
my tenants.  Do you approve of that, Miss Brooke?"

"A great mistake, Chettam," interposed Mr. Brooke, "going into
electrifying your land and that kind of thing, and making a parlor of
your cow-house. It won't do.  I went into science a great deal myself
at one time; but I saw it would not do.  It leads to everything; you
can let nothing alone.  No, no--see that your tenants don't sell their
straw, and that kind of thing; and give them draining-tiles, you know.
But your fancy farming will not do--the most expensive sort of whistle
you can buy: you may as well keep a pack of hounds."

"Surely," said Dorothea, "it is better to spend money in finding out
how men can make the most of the land which supports them all, than in
keeping dogs and horses only to gallop over it.  It is not a sin to
make yourself poor in performing experiments for the good of all."

She spoke with more energy than is expected of so young a lady, but Sir
James had appealed to her.  He was accustomed to do so, and she had
often thought that she could urge him to many good actions when he was
her brother-in-law.

Mr. Casaubon turned his eyes very markedly on Dorothea while she was
speaking, and seemed to observe her newly.

"Young ladies don't understand political economy, you know," said Mr.
Brooke, smiling towards Mr. Casaubon.  "I remember when we were all
reading Adam Smith.  _There_ is a book, now.  I took in all the new
ideas at one time--human perfectibility, now.  But some say, history
moves in circles; and that may be very well argued; I have argued it
myself.  The fact is, human reason may carry you a little too far--over
the hedge, in fact.  It carried me a good way at one time; but I saw it
would not do.  I pulled up; I pulled up in time.  But not too hard.  I
have always been in favor of a little theory: we must have Thought;
else we shall be landed back in the dark ages.  But talking of books,
there is Southey's 'Peninsular War.' I am reading that of a morning.
You know Southey?"

"No" said Mr. Casaubon, not keeping pace with Mr. Brooke's impetuous
reason, and thinking of the book only.  "I have little leisure for such
literature just now.  I have been using up my eyesight on old
characters lately; the fact is, I want a reader for my evenings; but I
am fastidious in voices, and I cannot endure listening to an imperfect
reader.  It is a misfortune, in some senses: I feed too much on the
inward sources; I live too much with the dead.  My mind is something
like the ghost of an ancient, wandering about the world and trying
mentally to construct it as it used to be, in spite of ruin and
confusing changes.  But I find it necessary to use the utmost caution
about my eyesight."

This was the first time that Mr. Casaubon had spoken at any length.  He
delivered himself with precision, as if he had been called upon to make
a public statement; and the balanced sing-song neatness of his speech,
occasionally corresponded to by a movement of his head, was the more
conspicuous from its contrast with good Mr. Brooke's scrappy
slovenliness.  Dorothea said to herself that Mr. Casaubon was the most
interesting man she had ever seen, not excepting even Monsieur Liret,
the Vaudois clergyman who had given conferences on the history of the
Waldenses.  To reconstruct a past world, doubtless with a view to the
highest purposes of truth--what a work to be in any way present at, to
assist in, though only as a lamp-holder!  This elevating thought lifted
her above her annoyance at being twitted with her ignorance of
political economy, that never-explained science which was thrust as an
extinguisher over all her lights.

"But you are fond of riding, Miss Brooke," Sir James presently took an
opportunity of saying.  "I should have thought you would enter a little
into the pleasures of hunting.  I wish you would let me send over a
chestnut horse for you to try.  It has been trained for a lady.  I saw
you on Saturday cantering over the hill on a nag not worthy of you.  My
groom shall bring Corydon for you every day, if you will only mention
the time."

"Thank you, you are very good.  I mean to give up riding.  I shall not
ride any more," said Dorothea, urged to this brusque resolution by a
little annoyance that Sir James would be soliciting her attention when
she wanted to give it all to Mr. Casaubon.

"No, that is too hard," said Sir James, in a tone of reproach that
showed strong interest.  "Your sister is given to self-mortification,
is she not?" he continued, turning to Celia, who sat at his right hand.

"I think she is," said Celia, feeling afraid lest she should say
something that would not please her sister, and blushing as prettily as
possible above her necklace.  "She likes giving up."

"If that were true, Celia, my giving-up would be self-indulgence, not
self-mortification. But there may be good reasons for choosing not to
do what is very agreeable," said Dorothea.

Mr. Brooke was speaking at the same time, but it was evident that Mr.
Casaubon was observing Dorothea, and she was aware of it.

"Exactly," said Sir James.  "You give up from some high, generous
motive."

"No, indeed, not exactly.  I did not say that of myself," answered
Dorothea, reddening.  Unlike Celia, she rarely blushed, and only from
high delight or anger.  At this moment she felt angry with the perverse
Sir James.  Why did he not pay attention to Celia, and leave her to
listen to Mr. Casaubon?--if that learned man would only talk, instead
of allowing himself to be talked to by Mr. Brooke, who was just then
informing him that the Reformation either meant something or it did
not, that he himself was a Protestant to the core, but that Catholicism
was a fact; and as to refusing an acre of your ground for a Romanist
chapel, all men needed the bridle of religion, which, properly
speaking, was the dread of a Hereafter.

"I made a great study of theology at one time," said Mr. Brooke, as if
to explain the insight just manifested.  "I know something of all
schools.  I knew Wilberforce in his best days.  Do you know
Wilberforce?"

Mr. Casaubon said, "No."

"Well, Wilberforce was perhaps not enough of a thinker; but if I went
into Parliament, as I have been asked to do, I should sit on the
independent bench, as Wilberforce did, and work at philanthropy."

Mr. Casaubon bowed, and observed that it was a wide field.

"Yes," said Mr. Brooke, with an easy smile, "but I have documents.  I
began a long while ago to collect documents.  They want arranging, but
when a question has struck me, I have written to somebody and got an
answer.  I have documents at my back.  But now, how do you arrange your
documents?"

"In pigeon-holes partly," said Mr. Casaubon, with rather a startled air
of effort.

"Ah, pigeon-holes will not do.  I have tried pigeon-holes, but
everything gets mixed in pigeon-holes: I never know whether a paper is
in A or Z."

"I wish you would let me sort your papers for you, uncle," said
Dorothea.  "I would letter them all, and then make a list of subjects
under each letter."

Mr. Casaubon gravely smiled approval, and said to Mr. Brooke, "You have
an excellent secretary at hand, you perceive."

"No, no," said Mr. Brooke, shaking his head; "I cannot let young ladies
meddle with my documents.  Young ladies are too flighty."

Dorothea felt hurt.  Mr. Casaubon would think that her uncle had some
special reason for delivering this opinion, whereas the remark lay in
his mind as lightly as the broken wing of an insect among all the other
fragments there, and a chance current had sent it alighting on _her_.

When the two girls were in the drawing-room alone, Celia said--

"How very ugly Mr. Casaubon is!"

"Celia!  He is one of the most distinguished-looking men I ever saw.
He is remarkably like the portrait of Locke.  He has the same deep
eye-sockets."

"Had Locke those two white moles with hairs on them?"

"Oh, I dare say! when people of a certain sort looked at him," said
Dorothea, walking away a little.

"Mr. Casaubon is so sallow."

"All the better.  I suppose you admire a man with the complexion of a
cochon de lait."

"Dodo!" exclaimed Celia, looking after her in surprise.  "I never heard
you make such a comparison before."

"Why should I make it before the occasion came?  It is a good
comparison: the match is perfect."

Miss Brooke was clearly forgetting herself, and Celia thought so.

"I wonder you show temper, Dorothea."

"It is so painful in you, Celia, that you will look at human beings as
if they were merely animals with a toilet, and never see the great soul
in a man's face."

"Has Mr. Casaubon a great soul?" Celia was not without a touch of naive
malice.

"Yes, I believe he has," said Dorothea, with the full voice of
decision.  "Everything I see in him corresponds to his pamphlet on
Biblical Cosmology."

"He talks very little," said Celia

"There is no one for him to talk to."

Celia thought privately, "Dorothea quite despises Sir James Chettam; I
believe she would not accept him." Celia felt that this was a pity.
She had never been deceived as to the object of the baronet's interest.
Sometimes, indeed, she had reflected that Dodo would perhaps not make a
husband happy who had not her way of looking at things; and stifled in
the depths of her heart was the feeling that her sister was too
religious for family comfort.  Notions and scruples were like spilt
needles, making one afraid of treading, or sitting down, or even eating.

When Miss Brooke was at the tea-table, Sir James came to sit down by
her, not having felt her mode of answering him at all offensive.  Why
should he?  He thought it probable that Miss Brooke liked him, and
manners must be very marked indeed before they cease to be interpreted
by preconceptions either confident or distrustful.  She was thoroughly
charming to him, but of course he theorized a little about his
attachment.  He was made of excellent human dough, and had the rare
merit of knowing that his talents, even if let loose, would not set the
smallest stream in the county on fire: hence he liked the prospect of a
wife to whom he could say, "What shall we do?" about this or that; who
could help her husband out with reasons, and would also have the
property qualification for doing so.  As to the excessive religiousness
alleged against Miss Brooke, he had a very indefinite notion of what it
consisted in, and thought that it would die out with marriage.  In
short, he felt himself to be in love in the right place, and was ready
to endure a great deal of predominance, which, after all, a man could
always put down when he liked.  Sir James had no idea that he should
ever like to put down the predominance of this handsome girl, in whose
cleverness he delighted.  Why not?  A man's mind--what there is of
it--has always the advantage of being masculine,--as the smallest
birch-tree is of a higher kind than the most soaring palm,--and even
his ignorance is of a sounder quality.  Sir James might not have
originated this estimate; but a kind Providence furnishes the limpest
personality with a little gum or starch in the form of tradition.

"Let me hope that you will rescind that resolution about the horse,
Miss Brooke," said the persevering admirer.  "I assure you, riding is
the most healthy of exercises."

"I am aware of it," said Dorothea, coldly.  "I think it would do Celia
good--if she would take to it."

"But you are such a perfect horsewoman."

"Excuse me; I have had very little practice, and I should be easily
thrown."

"Then that is a reason for more practice.  Every lady ought to be a
perfect horsewoman, that she may accompany her husband."

"You see how widely we differ, Sir James.  I have made up my mind that
I ought not to be a perfect horsewoman, and so I should never
correspond to your pattern of a lady." Dorothea looked straight before
her, and spoke with cold brusquerie, very much with the air of a
handsome boy, in amusing contrast with the solicitous amiability of her
admirer.

"I should like to know your reasons for this cruel resolution.  It is
not possible that you should think horsemanship wrong."

"It is quite possible that I should think it wrong for me."

"Oh, why?" said Sir James, in a tender tone of remonstrance.

Mr. Casaubon had come up to the table, teacup in hand, and was
listening.

"We must not inquire too curiously into motives," he interposed, in his
measured way.  "Miss Brooke knows that they are apt to become feeble in
the utterance: the aroma is mixed with the grosser air.  We must keep
the germinating grain away from the light."

Dorothea colored with pleasure, and looked up gratefully to the
speaker.  Here was a man who could understand the higher inward life,
and with whom there could be some spiritual communion; nay, who could
illuminate principle with the widest knowledge a man whose learning
almost amounted to a proof of whatever he believed!

Dorothea's inferences may seem large; but really life could never have
gone on at any period but for this liberal allowance of conclusions,
which has facilitated marriage under the difficulties of civilization.
Has any one ever pinched into its pilulous smallness the cobweb of
pre-matrimonial acquaintanceship?

"Certainly," said good Sir James.  "Miss Brooke shall not be urged to
tell reasons she would rather be silent upon.  I am sure her reasons
would do her honor."

He was not in the least jealous of the interest with which Dorothea had
looked up at Mr. Casaubon: it never occurred to him that a girl to whom
he was meditating an offer of marriage could care for a dried bookworm
towards fifty, except, indeed, in a religious sort of way, as for a
clergyman of some distinction.

However, since Miss Brooke had become engaged in a conversation with
Mr. Casaubon about the Vaudois clergy, Sir James betook himself to
Celia, and talked to her about her sister; spoke of a house in town,
and asked whether Miss Brooke disliked London.  Away from her sister,
Celia talked quite easily, and Sir James said to himself that the
second Miss Brooke was certainly very agreeable as well as pretty,
though not, as some people pretended, more clever and sensible than the
elder sister.  He felt that he had chosen the one who was in all
respects the superior; and a man naturally likes to look forward to
having the best.  He would be the very Mawworm of bachelors who
pretended not to expect it.



CHAPTER III.

    "Say, goddess, what ensued, when Raphael,
     The affable archangel . . .
                                           Eve
     The story heard attentive, and was filled
     With admiration, and deep muse, to hear
     Of things so high and strange."
                               --Paradise Lost, B. vii.


If it had really occurred to Mr. Casaubon to think of Miss Brooke as a
suitable wife for him, the reasons that might induce her to accept him
were already planted in her mind, and by the evening of the next day
the reasons had budded and bloomed.  For they had had a long
conversation in the morning, while Celia, who did not like the company
of Mr. Casaubon's moles and sallowness, had escaped to the vicarage to
play with the curate's ill-shod but merry children.

Dorothea by this time had looked deep into the ungauged reservoir of
Mr. Casaubon's mind, seeing reflected there in vague labyrinthine
extension every quality she herself brought; had opened much of her own
experience to him, and had understood from him the scope of his great
work, also of attractively labyrinthine extent.  For he had been as
instructive as Milton's "affable archangel;" and with something of the
archangelic manner he told her how he had undertaken to show (what
indeed had been attempted before, but not with that thoroughness,
justice of comparison, and effectiveness of arrangement at which Mr.
Casaubon aimed) that all the mythical systems or erratic mythical
fragments in the world were corruptions of a tradition originally
revealed.  Having once mastered the true position and taken a firm
footing there, the vast field of mythical constructions became
intelligible, nay, luminous with the reflected light of
correspondences.  But to gather in this great harvest of truth was no
light or speedy work.  His notes already made a formidable range of
volumes, but the crowning task would be to condense these voluminous
still-accumulating results and bring them, like the earlier vintage of
Hippocratic books, to fit a little shelf.  In explaining this to
Dorothea, Mr. Casaubon expressed himself nearly as he would have done
to a fellow-student, for he had not two styles of talking at command:
it is true that when he used a Greek or Latin phrase he always gave the
English with scrupulous care, but he would probably have done this in
any case.  A learned provincial clergyman is accustomed to think of his
acquaintances as of "lords, knyghtes, and other noble and worthi men,
that conne Latyn but lytille."

Dorothea was altogether captivated by the wide embrace of this
conception.  Here was something beyond the shallows of ladies' school
literature: here was a living Bossuet, whose work would reconcile
complete knowledge with devoted piety; here was a modern Augustine who
united the glories of doctor and saint.

The sanctity seemed no less clearly marked than the learning, for when
Dorothea was impelled to open her mind on certain themes which she
could speak of to no one whom she had before seen at Tipton, especially
on the secondary importance of ecclesiastical forms and articles of
belief compared with that spiritual religion, that submergence of self
in communion with Divine perfection which seemed to her to be expressed
in the best Christian books of widely distant ages, she found in Mr.
Casaubon a listener who understood her at once, who could assure her of
his own agreement with that view when duly tempered with wise
conformity, and could mention historical examples before unknown to her.

"He thinks with me," said Dorothea to herself, "or rather, he thinks a
whole world of which my thought is but a poor twopenny mirror.  And his
feelings too, his whole experience--what a lake compared with my little
pool!"

Miss Brooke argued from words and dispositions not less unhesitatingly
than other young ladies of her age.  Signs are small measurable things,
but interpretations are illimitable, and in girls of sweet, ardent
nature, every sign is apt to conjure up wonder, hope, belief, vast as a
sky, and colored by a diffused thimbleful of matter in the shape of
knowledge.  They are not always too grossly deceived; for Sinbad
himself may have fallen by good-luck on a true description, and wrong
reasoning sometimes lands poor mortals in right conclusions: starting a
long way off the true point, and proceeding by loops and zigzags, we
now and then arrive just where we ought to be.  Because Miss Brooke was
hasty in her trust, it is not therefore clear that Mr. Casaubon was
unworthy of it.

He stayed a little longer than he had intended, on a slight pressure of
invitation from Mr. Brooke, who offered no bait except his own
documents on machine-breaking and rick-burning. Mr. Casaubon was called
into the library to look at these in a heap, while his host picked up
first one and then the other to read aloud from in a skipping and
uncertain way, passing from one unfinished passage to another with a
"Yes, now, but here!" and finally pushing them all aside to open the
journal of his youthful Continental travels.

"Look here--here is all about Greece.  Rhamnus, the ruins of
Rhamnus--you are a great Grecian, now.  I don't know whether you have
given much study to the topography.  I spent no end of time in making
out these things--Helicon, now.  Here, now!--'We started the next
morning for Parnassus, the double-peaked Parnassus.' All this volume is
about Greece, you know," Mr. Brooke wound up, rubbing his thumb
transversely along the edges of the leaves as he held the book forward.

Mr. Casaubon made a dignified though somewhat sad audience; bowed in
the right place, and avoided looking at anything documentary as far as
possible, without showing disregard or impatience; mindful that this
desultoriness was associated with the institutions of the country, and
that the man who took him on this severe mental scamper was not only an
amiable host, but a landholder and custos rotulorum. Was his endurance
aided also by the reflection that Mr. Brooke was the uncle of Dorothea?

Certainly he seemed more and more bent on making her talk to him, on
drawing her out, as Celia remarked to herself; and in looking at her
his face was often lit up by a smile like pale wintry sunshine.  Before
he left the next morning, while taking a pleasant walk with Miss Brooke
along the gravelled terrace, he had mentioned to her that he felt the
disadvantage of loneliness, the need of that cheerful companionship
with which the presence of youth can lighten or vary the serious toils
of maturity.  And he delivered this statement with as much careful
precision as if he had been a diplomatic envoy whose words would be
attended with results.  Indeed, Mr. Casaubon was not used to expect
that he should have to repeat or revise his communications of a
practical or personal kind.  The inclinations which he had deliberately
stated on the 2d of October he would think it enough to refer to by the
mention of that date; judging by the standard of his own memory, which
was a volume where a vide supra could serve instead of repetitions, and
not the ordinary long-used blotting-book which only tells of forgotten
writing.  But in this case Mr. Casaubon's confidence was not likely to
be falsified, for Dorothea heard and retained what he said with the
eager interest of a fresh young nature to which every variety in
experience is an epoch.

It was three o'clock in the beautiful breezy autumn day when Mr.
Casaubon drove off to his Rectory at Lowick, only five miles from
Tipton; and Dorothea, who had on her bonnet and shawl, hurried along
the shrubbery and across the park that she might wander through the
bordering wood with no other visible companionship than that of Monk,
the Great St. Bernard dog, who always took care of the young ladies in
their walks.  There had risen before her the girl's vision of a
possible future for herself to which she looked forward with trembling
hope, and she wanted to wander on in that visionary future without
interruption.  She walked briskly in the brisk air, the color rose in
her cheeks, and her straw bonnet (which our contemporaries might look
at with conjectural curiosity as at an obsolete form of basket) fell a
little backward.  She would perhaps be hardly characterized enough if
it were omitted that she wore her brown hair flatly braided and coiled
behind so as to expose the outline of her head in a daring manner at a
time when public feeling required the meagreness of nature to be
dissimulated by tall barricades of frizzed curls and bows, never
surpassed by any great race except the Feejeean.  This was a trait of
Miss Brooke's asceticism.  But there was nothing of an ascetic's
expression in her bright full eyes, as she looked before her, not
consciously seeing, but absorbing into the intensity of her mood, the
solemn glory of the afternoon with its long swathes of light between
the far-off rows of limes, whose shadows touched each other.

All people, young or old (that is, all people in those ante-reform
times), would have thought her an interesting object if they had
referred the glow in her eyes and cheeks to the newly awakened ordinary
images of young love: the illusions of Chloe about Strephon have been
sufficiently consecrated in poetry, as the pathetic loveliness of all
spontaneous trust ought to be.  Miss Pippin adoring young Pumpkin, and
dreaming along endless vistas of unwearying companionship, was a little
drama which never tired our fathers and mothers, and had been put into
all costumes.  Let but Pumpkin have a figure which would sustain the
disadvantages of the shortwaisted swallow-tail, and everybody felt it
not only natural but necessary to the perfection of womanhood, that a
sweet girl should be at once convinced of his virtue, his exceptional
ability, and above all, his perfect sincerity.  But perhaps no persons
then living--certainly none in the neighborhood of Tipton--would have
had a sympathetic understanding for the dreams of a girl whose notions
about marriage took their color entirely from an exalted enthusiasm
about the ends of life, an enthusiasm which was lit chiefly by its own
fire, and included neither the niceties of the trousseau, the pattern
of plate, nor even the honors and sweet joys of the blooming matron.

It had now entered Dorothea's mind that Mr. Casaubon might wish to make
her his wife, and the idea that he would do so touched her with a sort
of reverential gratitude.  How good of him--nay, it would be almost as
if a winged messenger had suddenly stood beside her path and held out
his hand towards her!  For a long while she had been oppressed by the
indefiniteness which hung in her mind, like a thick summer haze, over
all her desire to make her life greatly effective.  What could she do,
what ought she to do?--she, hardly more than a budding woman, but yet
with an active conscience and a great mental need, not to be satisfied
by a girlish instruction comparable to the nibblings and judgments of a
discursive mouse.  With some endowment of stupidity and conceit, she
might have thought that a Christian young lady of fortune should find
her ideal of life in village charities, patronage of the humbler
clergy, the perusal of "Female Scripture Characters," unfolding the
private experience of Sara under the Old Dispensation, and Dorcas under
the New, and the care of her soul over her embroidery in her own
boudoir--with a background of prospective marriage to a man who, if
less strict than herself, as being involved in affairs religiously
inexplicable, might be prayed for and seasonably exhorted.  From such
contentment poor Dorothea was shut out.  The intensity of her religious
disposition, the coercion it exercised over her life, was but one
aspect of a nature altogether ardent, theoretic, and intellectually
consequent: and with such a nature struggling in the bands of a narrow
teaching, hemmed in by a social life which seemed nothing but a
labyrinth of petty courses, a walled-in maze of small paths that led no
whither, the outcome was sure to strike others as at once exaggeration
and inconsistency.  The thing which seemed to her best, she wanted to
justify by the completest knowledge; and not to live in a pretended
admission of rules which were never acted on.  Into this soul-hunger as
yet all her youthful passion was poured; the union which attracted her
was one that would deliver her from her girlish subjection to her own
ignorance, and give her the freedom of voluntary submission to a guide
who would take her along the grandest path.

"I should learn everything then," she said to herself, still walking
quickly along the bridle road through the wood.  "It would be my duty
to study that I might help him the better in his great works.  There
would be nothing trivial about our lives.  Every-day things with us
would mean the greatest things.  It would be like marrying Pascal.  I
should learn to see the truth by the same light as great men have seen
it by.  And then I should know what to do, when I got older: I should
see how it was possible to lead a grand life here--now--in England.  I
don't feel sure about doing good in any way now: everything seems like
going on a mission to a people whose language I don't know;--unless it
were building good cottages--there can be no doubt about that.  Oh, I
hope I should be able to get the people well housed in Lowick!  I will
draw plenty of plans while I have time."

Dorothea checked herself suddenly with self-rebuke for the presumptuous
way in which she was reckoning on uncertain events, but she was spared
any inward effort to change the direction of her thoughts by the
appearance of a cantering horseman round a turning of the road.  The
well-groomed chestnut horse and two beautiful setters could leave no
doubt that the rider was Sir James Chettam.  He discerned Dorothea,
jumped off his horse at once, and, having delivered it to his groom,
advanced towards her with something white on his arm, at which the two
setters were barking in an excited manner.

"How delightful to meet you, Miss Brooke," he said, raising his hat and
showing his sleekly waving blond hair.  "It has hastened the pleasure I
was looking forward to."

Miss Brooke was annoyed at the interruption.  This amiable baronet,
really a suitable husband for Celia, exaggerated the necessity of
making himself agreeable to the elder sister.  Even a prospective
brother-in-law may be an oppression if he will always be presupposing
too good an understanding with you, and agreeing with you even when you
contradict him.  The thought that he had made the mistake of paying his
addresses to herself could not take shape: all her mental activity was
used up in persuasions of another kind.  But he was positively
obtrusive at this moment, and his dimpled hands were quite
disagreeable.  Her roused temper made her color deeply, as she returned
his greeting with some haughtiness.

Sir James interpreted the heightened color in the way most gratifying
to himself, and thought he never saw Miss Brooke looking so handsome.

"I have brought a little petitioner," he said, "or rather, I have
brought him to see if he will be approved before his petition is
offered." He showed the white object under his arm, which was a tiny
Maltese puppy, one of nature's most naive toys.

"It is painful to me to see these creatures that are bred merely as
pets," said Dorothea, whose opinion was forming itself that very moment
(as opinions will) under the heat of irritation.

"Oh, why?" said Sir James, as they walked forward.

"I believe all the petting that is given them does not make them happy.
They are too helpless: their lives are too frail.  A weasel or a mouse
that gets its own living is more interesting.  I like to think that the
animals about us have souls something like our own, and either carry on
their own little affairs or can be companions to us, like Monk here.
Those creatures are parasitic."

"I am so glad I know that you do not like them," said good Sir James.
"I should never keep them for myself, but ladies usually are fond of
these Maltese dogs.  Here, John, take this dog, will you?"

The objectionable puppy, whose nose and eyes were equally black and
expressive, was thus got rid of, since Miss Brooke decided that it had
better not have been born.  But she felt it necessary to explain.

"You must not judge of Celia's feeling from mine.  I think she likes
these small pets.  She had a tiny terrier once, which she was very fond
of.  It made me unhappy, because I was afraid of treading on it.  I am
rather short-sighted."

"You have your own opinion about everything, Miss Brooke, and it is
always a good opinion."

What answer was possible to such stupid complimenting?

"Do you know, I envy you that," Sir James said, as they continued
walking at the rather brisk pace set by Dorothea.

"I don't quite understand what you mean."

"Your power of forming an opinion.  I can form an opinion of persons.
I know when I like people.  But about other matters, do you know, I
have often a difficulty in deciding.  One hears very sensible things
said on opposite sides."

"Or that seem sensible.  Perhaps we don't always discriminate between
sense and nonsense."

Dorothea felt that she was rather rude.

"Exactly," said Sir James.  "But you seem to have the power of
discrimination."

"On the contrary, I am often unable to decide.  But that is from
ignorance.  The right conclusion is there all the same, though I am
unable to see it."

"I think there are few who would see it more readily.  Do you know,
Lovegood was telling me yesterday that you had the best notion in the
world of a plan for cottages--quite wonderful for a young lady, he
thought.  You had a real _genus_, to use his expression.  He said you
wanted Mr. Brooke to build a new set of cottages, but he seemed to
think it hardly probable that your uncle would consent.  Do you know,
that is one of the things I wish to do--I mean, on my own estate.  I
should be so glad to carry out that plan of yours, if you would let me
see it.  Of course, it is sinking money; that is why people object to
it.  Laborers can never pay rent to make it answer.  But, after all, it
is worth doing."

"Worth doing! yes, indeed," said Dorothea, energetically, forgetting
her previous small vexations.  "I think we deserve to be beaten out of
our beautiful houses with a scourge of small cords--all of us who let
tenants live in such sties as we see round us.  Life in cottages might
be happier than ours, if they were real houses fit for human beings
from whom we expect duties and affections."

"Will you show me your plan?"

"Yes, certainly.  I dare say it is very faulty.  But I have been
examining all the plans for cottages in Loudon's book, and picked out
what seem the best things.  Oh what a happiness it would be to set the
pattern about here!  I think instead of Lazarus at the gate, we should
put the pigsty cottages outside the park-gate."

Dorothea was in the best temper now.  Sir James, as brother in-law,
building model cottages on his estate, and then, perhaps, others being
built at Lowick, and more and more elsewhere in imitation--it would be
as if the spirit of Oberlin had passed over the parishes to make the
life of poverty beautiful!

Sir James saw all the plans, and took one away to consult upon with
Lovegood.  He also took away a complacent sense that he was making
great progress in Miss Brooke's good opinion.  The Maltese puppy was
not offered to Celia; an omission which Dorothea afterwards thought of
with surprise; but she blamed herself for it.  She had been engrossing
Sir James.  After all, it was a relief that there was no puppy to tread
upon.

Celia was present while the plans were being examined, and observed Sir
James's illusion.  "He thinks that Dodo cares about him, and she only
cares about her plans.  Yet I am not certain that she would refuse him
if she thought he would let her manage everything and carry out all her
notions.  And how very uncomfortable Sir James would be!  I cannot bear
notions."

It was Celia's private luxury to indulge in this dislike.  She dared
not confess it to her sister in any direct statement, for that would be
laying herself open to a demonstration that she was somehow or other at
war with all goodness.  But on safe opportunities, she had an indirect
mode of making her negative wisdom tell upon Dorothea, and calling her
down from her rhapsodic mood by reminding her that people were staring,
not listening.  Celia was not impulsive: what she had to say could
wait, and came from her always with the same quiet staccato evenness.
When people talked with energy and emphasis she watched their faces and
features merely.  She never could understand how well-bred persons
consented to sing and open their mouths in the ridiculous manner
requisite for that vocal exercise.

It was not many days before Mr. Casaubon paid a morning visit, on which
he was invited again for the following week to dine and stay the night.
Thus Dorothea had three more conversations with him, and was convinced
that her first impressions had been just.  He was all she had at first
imagined him to be: almost everything he had said seemed like a
specimen from a mine, or the inscription on the door of a museum which
might open on the treasures of past ages; and this trust in his mental
wealth was all the deeper and more effective on her inclination because
it was now obvious that his visits were made for her sake.  This
accomplished man condescended to think of a young girl, and take the
pains to talk to her, not with absurd compliment, but with an appeal to
her understanding, and sometimes with instructive correction.  What
delightful companionship!  Mr. Casaubon seemed even unconscious that
trivialities existed, and never handed round that small-talk of heavy
men which is as acceptable as stale bride-cake brought forth with an
odor of cupboard.  He talked of what he was interested in, or else he
was silent and bowed with sad civility.  To Dorothea this was adorable
genuineness, and religious abstinence from that artificiality which
uses up the soul in the efforts of pretence.  For she looked as
reverently at Mr. Casaubon's religious elevation above herself as she
did at his intellect and learning.  He assented to her expressions of
devout feeling, and usually with an appropriate quotation; he allowed
himself to say that he had gone through some spiritual conflicts in his
youth; in short, Dorothea saw that here she might reckon on
understanding, sympathy, and guidance.  On one--only one--of her
favorite themes she was disappointed.  Mr. Casaubon apparently did not
care about building cottages, and diverted the talk to the extremely
narrow accommodation which was to be had in the dwellings of the
ancient Egyptians, as if to check a too high standard.  After he was
gone, Dorothea dwelt with some agitation on this indifference of his;
and her mind was much exercised with arguments drawn from the varying
conditions of climate which modify human needs, and from the admitted
wickedness of pagan despots.  Should she not urge these arguments on
Mr. Casaubon when he came again?  But further reflection told her that
she was presumptuous in demanding his attention to such a subject; he
would not disapprove of her occupying herself with it in leisure
moments, as other women expected to occupy themselves with their dress
and embroidery--would not forbid it when--Dorothea felt rather ashamed
as she detected herself in these speculations.  But her uncle had been
invited to go to Lowick to stay a couple of days: was it reasonable to
suppose that Mr. Casaubon delighted in Mr. Brooke's society for its own
sake, either with or without documents?

Meanwhile that little disappointment made her delight the more in Sir
James Chettam's readiness to set on foot the desired improvements.  He
came much oftener than Mr. Casaubon, and Dorothea ceased to find him
disagreeable since he showed himself so entirely in earnest; for he had
already entered with much practical ability into Lovegood's estimates,
and was charmingly docile.  She proposed to build a couple of cottages,
and transfer two families from their old cabins, which could then be
pulled down, so that new ones could be built on the old sites.  Sir
James said "Exactly," and she bore the word remarkably well.

Certainly these men who had so few spontaneous ideas might be very
useful members of society under good feminine direction, if they were
fortunate in choosing their sisters-in-law!  It is difficult to say
whether there was or was not a little wilfulness in her continuing
blind to the possibility that another sort of choice was in question in
relation to her.  But her life was just now full of hope and action:
she was not only thinking of her plans, but getting down learned books
from the library and reading many things hastily (that she might be a
little less ignorant in talking to Mr. Casaubon), all the while being
visited with conscientious questionings whether she were not exalting
these poor doings above measure and contemplating them with that
self-satisfaction which was the last doom of ignorance and folly.



CHAPTER IV.

    1st Gent. Our deeds are fetters that we forge ourselves.
    2d Gent.  Ay, truly: but I think it is the world
                 That brings the iron.


"Sir James seems determined to do everything you wish," said Celia, as
they were driving home from an inspection of the new building-site.

"He is a good creature, and more sensible than any one would imagine,"
said Dorothea, inconsiderately.

"You mean that he appears silly."

"No, no," said Dorothea, recollecting herself, and laying her hand on
her sister's a moment, "but he does not talk equally well on all
subjects."

"I should think none but disagreeable people do," said Celia, in her
usual purring way.  "They must be very dreadful to live with.  Only
think! at breakfast, and always."

Dorothea laughed.  "O Kitty, you are a wonderful creature!" She pinched
Celia's chin, being in the mood now to think her very winning and
lovely--fit hereafter to be an eternal cherub, and if it were not
doctrinally wrong to say so, hardly more in need of salvation than a
squirrel.  "Of course people need not be always talking well.  Only one
tells the quality of their minds when they try to talk well."

"You mean that Sir James tries and fails."

"I was speaking generally.  Why do you catechise me about Sir James?
It is not the object of his life to please me."

"Now, Dodo, can you really believe that?"

"Certainly. He thinks of me as a future sister--that is all." Dorothea
had never hinted this before, waiting, from a certain shyness on such
subjects which was mutual between the sisters, until it should be
introduced by some decisive event.  Celia blushed, but said at once--

"Pray do not make that mistake any longer, Dodo.  When Tantripp was
brushing my hair the other day, she said that Sir James's man knew from
Mrs. Cadwallader's maid that Sir James was to marry the eldest Miss
Brooke."

"How can you let Tantripp talk such gossip to you, Celia?" said
Dorothea, indignantly, not the less angry because details asleep in her
memory were now awakened to confirm the unwelcome revelation.  "You
must have asked her questions.  It is degrading."

"I see no harm at all in Tantripp's talking to me.  It is better to
hear what people say.  You see what mistakes you make by taking up
notions.  I am quite sure that Sir James means to make you an offer;
and he believes that you will accept him, especially since you have
been so pleased with him about the plans.  And uncle too--I know he
expects it.  Every one can see that Sir James is very much in love with
you."

The revulsion was so strong and painful in Dorothea's mind that the
tears welled up and flowed abundantly.  All her dear plans were
embittered, and she thought with disgust of Sir James's conceiving that
she recognized him as her lover.  There was vexation too on account of
Celia.

"How could he expect it?" she burst forth in her most impetuous manner.
"I have never agreed with him about anything but the cottages: I was
barely polite to him before."

"But you have been so pleased with him since then; he has begun to feel
quite sure that you are fond of him."

"Fond of him, Celia!  How can you choose such odious expressions?" said
Dorothea, passionately.

"Dear me, Dorothea, I suppose it would be right for you to be fond of a
man whom you accepted for a husband."

"It is offensive to me to say that Sir James could think I was fond of
him.  Besides, it is not the right word for the feeling I must have
towards the man I would accept as a husband."

"Well, I am sorry for Sir James.  I thought it right to tell you,
because you went on as you always do, never looking just where you are,
and treading in the wrong place.  You always see what nobody else sees;
it is impossible to satisfy you; yet you never see what is quite plain.
That's your way, Dodo." Something certainly gave Celia unusual courage;
and she was not sparing the sister of whom she was occasionally in awe.
Who can tell what just criticisms Murr the Cat may be passing on us
beings of wider speculation?

"It is very painful," said Dorothea, feeling scourged.  "I can have no
more to do with the cottages.  I must be uncivil to him.  I must tell
him I will have nothing to do with them.  It is very painful." Her eyes
filled again with tears.

"Wait a little.  Think about it.  You know he is going away for a day
or two to see his sister.  There will be nobody besides Lovegood."
Celia could not help relenting.  "Poor Dodo," she went on, in an
amiable staccato.  "It is very hard: it is your favorite _fad_ to draw
plans."

"_Fad_ to draw plans!  Do you think I only care about my
fellow-creatures' houses in that childish way?  I may well make
mistakes.  How can one ever do anything nobly Christian, living among
people with such petty thoughts?"

No more was said; Dorothea was too much jarred to recover her temper
and behave so as to show that she admitted any error in herself.  She
was disposed rather to accuse the intolerable narrowness and the
purblind conscience of the society around her: and Celia was no longer
the eternal cherub, but a thorn in her spirit, a pink-and-white
nullifidian, worse than any discouraging presence in the "Pilgrim's
Progress." The _fad_ of drawing plans!  What was life worth--what great
faith was possible when the whole effect of one's actions could be
withered up into such parched rubbish as that?  When she got out of the
carriage, her cheeks were pale and her eyelids red.  She was an image
of sorrow, and her uncle who met her in the hall would have been
alarmed, if Celia had not been close to her looking so pretty and
composed, that he at once concluded Dorothea's tears to have their
origin in her excessive religiousness.  He had returned, during their
absence, from a journey to the county town, about a petition for the
pardon of some criminal.

"Well, my dears," he said, kindly, as they went up to kiss him, "I hope
nothing disagreeable has happened while I have been away."

"No, uncle," said Celia, "we have been to Freshitt to look at the
cottages.  We thought you would have been at home to lunch."

"I came by Lowick to lunch--you didn't know I came by Lowick.  And I
have brought a couple of pamphlets for you, Dorothea--in the library,
you know; they lie on the table in the library."

It seemed as if an electric stream went through Dorothea, thrilling her
from despair into expectation.  They were pamphlets about the early
Church.  The oppression of Celia, Tantripp, and Sir James was shaken
off, and she walked straight to the library.  Celia went up-stairs. Mr.
Brooke was detained by a message, but when he re-entered the library,
he found Dorothea seated and already deep in one of the pamphlets which
had some marginal manuscript of Mr. Casaubon's,--taking it in as
eagerly as she might have taken in the scent of a fresh bouquet after a
dry, hot, dreary walk.

She was getting away from Tipton and Freshitt, and her own sad
liability to tread in the wrong places on her way to the New Jerusalem.

Mr. Brooke sat down in his arm-chair, stretched his legs towards the
wood-fire, which had fallen into a wondrous mass of glowing dice
between the dogs, and rubbed his hands gently, looking very mildly
towards Dorothea, but with a neutral leisurely air, as if he had
nothing particular to say.  Dorothea closed her pamphlet, as soon as
she was aware of her uncle's presence, and rose as if to go.  Usually
she would have been interested about her uncle's merciful errand on
behalf of the criminal, but her late agitation had made her
absent-minded.

"I came back by Lowick, you know," said Mr. Brooke, not as if with any
intention to arrest her departure, but apparently from his usual
tendency to say what he had said before.  This fundamental principle of
human speech was markedly exhibited in Mr. Brooke.  "I lunched there
and saw Casaubon's library, and that kind of thing.  There's a sharp
air, driving.  Won't you sit down, my dear?  You look cold."

Dorothea felt quite inclined to accept the invitation.  Some times,
when her uncle's easy way of taking things did not happen to be
exasperating, it was rather soothing.  She threw off her mantle and
bonnet, and sat down opposite to him, enjoying the glow, but lifting up
her beautiful hands for a screen.  They were not thin hands, or small
hands; but powerful, feminine, maternal hands.  She seemed to be
holding them up in propitiation for her passionate desire to know and
to think, which in the unfriendly mediums of Tipton and Freshitt had
issued in crying and red eyelids.

She bethought herself now of the condemned criminal.  "What news have
you brought about the sheep-stealer, uncle?"

"What, poor Bunch?--well, it seems we can't get him off--he is to be
hanged."

Dorothea's brow took an expression of reprobation and pity.

"Hanged, you know," said Mr. Brooke, with a quiet nod.  "Poor Romilly!
he would have helped us.  I knew Romilly.  Casaubon didn't know
Romilly.  He is a little buried in books, you know, Casaubon is."

"When a man has great studies and is writing a great work, he must of
course give up seeing much of the world.  How can he go about making
acquaintances?"

"That's true.  But a man mopes, you know.  I have always been a
bachelor too, but I have that sort of disposition that I never moped;
it was my way to go about everywhere and take in everything.  I never
moped: but I can see that Casaubon does, you know.  He wants a
companion--a companion, you know."

"It would be a great honor to any one to be his companion," said
Dorothea, energetically.

"You like him, eh?" said Mr. Brooke, without showing any surprise, or
other emotion.  "Well, now, I've known Casaubon ten years, ever since
he came to Lowick.  But I never got anything out of him--any ideas, you
know.  However, he is a tiptop man and may be a bishop--that kind of
thing, you know, if Peel stays in.  And he has a very high opinion of
you, my dear."

Dorothea could not speak.

"The fact is, he has a very high opinion indeed of you.  And he speaks
uncommonly well--does Casaubon.  He has deferred to me, you not being
of age.  In short, I have promised to speak to you, though I told him I
thought there was not much chance.  I was bound to tell him that.  I
said, my niece is very young, and that kind of thing.  But I didn't
think it necessary to go into everything.  However, the long and the
short of it is, that he has asked my permission to make you an offer of
marriage--of marriage, you know," said Mr. Brooke, with his explanatory
nod.  "I thought it better to tell you, my dear."

No one could have detected any anxiety in Mr. Brooke's manner, but he
did really wish to know something of his niece's mind, that, if there
were any need for advice, he might give it in time.  What feeling he,
as a magistrate who had taken in so many ideas, could make room for,
was unmixedly kind.  Since Dorothea did not speak immediately, he
repeated, "I thought it better to tell you, my dear."

"Thank you, uncle," said Dorothea, in a clear unwavering tone.  "I am
very grateful to Mr. Casaubon.  If he makes me an offer, I shall accept
him.  I admire and honor him more than any man I ever saw."

Mr. Brooke paused a little, and then said in a lingering low tone, "Ah?
. . .  Well!  He is a good match in some respects.  But now, Chettam is
a good match.  And our land lies together.  I shall never interfere
against your wishes, my dear.  People should have their own way in
marriage, and that sort of thing--up to a certain point, you know.  I
have always said that, up to a certain point.  I wish you to marry
well; and I have good reason to believe that Chettam wishes to marry
you.  I mention it, you know."

"It is impossible that I should ever marry Sir James Chettam," said
Dorothea.  "If he thinks of marrying me, he has made a great mistake."

"That is it, you see.  One never knows.  I should have thought Chettam
was just the sort of man a woman would like, now."

"Pray do not mention him in that light again, uncle," said Dorothea,
feeling some of her late irritation revive.

Mr. Brooke wondered, and felt that women were an inexhaustible subject
of study, since even he at his age was not in a perfect state of
scientific prediction about them.  Here was a fellow like Chettam with
no chance at all.

"Well, but Casaubon, now.  There is no hurry--I mean for you.  It's
true, every year will tell upon him.  He is over five-and-forty, you
know.  I should say a good seven-and-twenty years older than you.  To
be sure,--if you like learning and standing, and that sort of thing, we
can't have everything.  And his income is good--he has a handsome
property independent of the Church--his income is good.  Still he is
not young, and I must not conceal from you, my dear, that I think his
health is not over-strong. I know nothing else against him."

"I should not wish to have a husband very near my own age," said
Dorothea, with grave decision.  "I should wish to have a husband who
was above me in judgment and in all knowledge."

Mr. Brooke repeated his subdued, "Ah?--I thought you had more of your
own opinion than most girls.  I thought you liked your own
opinion--liked it, you know."

"I cannot imagine myself living without some opinions, but I should
wish to have good reasons for them, and a wise man could help me to see
which opinions had the best foundation, and would help me to live
according to them."

"Very true.  You couldn't put the thing better--couldn't put it better,
beforehand, you know.  But there are oddities in things," continued Mr.
Brooke, whose conscience was really roused to do the best he could for
his niece on this occasion.  "Life isn't cast in a mould--not cut out
by rule and line, and that sort of thing.  I never married myself, and
it will be the better for you and yours.  The fact is, I never loved
any one well enough to put myself into a noose for them.  It _is_ a
noose, you know.  Temper, now.  There is temper.  And a husband likes
to be master."

"I know that I must expect trials, uncle.  Marriage is a state of
higher duties.  I never thought of it as mere personal ease," said poor
Dorothea.

"Well, you are not fond of show, a great establishment, balls, dinners,
that kind of thing.  I can see that Casaubon's ways might suit you
better than Chettam's. And you shall do as you like, my dear.  I would
not hinder Casaubon; I said so at once; for there is no knowing how
anything may turn out.  You have not the same tastes as every young
lady; and a clergyman and scholar--who may be a bishop--that kind of
thing--may suit you better than Chettam.  Chettam is a good fellow, a
good sound-hearted fellow, you know; but he doesn't go much into ideas.
I did, when I was his age.  But Casaubon's eyes, now.  I think he has
hurt them a little with too much reading."

"I should be all the happier, uncle, the more room there was for me to
help him," said Dorothea, ardently.

"You have quite made up your mind, I see.  Well, my dear, the fact is,
I have a letter for you in my pocket." Mr. Brooke handed the letter to
Dorothea, but as she rose to go away, he added, "There is not too much
hurry, my dear.  Think about it, you know."

When Dorothea had left him, he reflected that he had certainly spoken
strongly: he had put the risks of marriage before her in a striking
manner.  It was his duty to do so.  But as to pretending to be wise for
young people,--no uncle, however much he had travelled in his youth,
absorbed the new ideas, and dined with celebrities now deceased, could
pretend to judge what sort of marriage would turn out well for a young
girl who preferred Casaubon to Chettam.  In short, woman was a problem
which, since Mr. Brooke's mind felt blank before it, could be hardly
less complicated than the revolutions of an irregular solid.



CHAPTER V.

    "Hard students are commonly troubled with gowts, catarrhs,
    rheums, cachexia, bradypepsia, bad eyes, stone, and collick,
    crudities, oppilations, vertigo, winds, consumptions, and
    all such diseases as come by over-much sitting: they are
    most part lean, dry, ill-colored . . . and all through
    immoderate pains and extraordinary studies. If you will not
    believe the truth of this, look upon great Tostatus and
    Thomas Aquainas' works; and tell me whether those men took
    pains."--BURTON'S Anatomy of Melancholy, P. I, s. 2.


This was Mr. Casaubon's letter.


MY DEAR MISS BROOKE,--I have your guardian's permission to address you
on a subject than which I have none more at heart.  I am not, I trust,
mistaken in the recognition of some deeper correspondence than that of
date in the fact that a consciousness of need in my own life had arisen
contemporaneously with the possibility of my becoming acquainted with
you.  For in the first hour of meeting you, I had an impression of your
eminent and perhaps exclusive fitness to supply that need (connected, I
may say, with such activity of the affections as even the
preoccupations of a work too special to be abdicated could not
uninterruptedly dissimulate); and each succeeding opportunity for
observation has given the impression an added depth by convincing me
more emphatically of that fitness which I had preconceived, and thus
evoking more decisively those affections to which I have but now
referred.  Our conversations have, I think, made sufficiently clear to
you the tenor of my life and purposes: a tenor unsuited, I am aware, to
the commoner order of minds.  But I have discerned in you an elevation
of thought and a capability of devotedness, which I had hitherto not
conceived to be compatible either with the early bloom of youth or with
those graces of sex that may be said at once to win and to confer
distinction when combined, as they notably are in you, with the mental
qualities above indicated.  It was, I confess, beyond my hope to meet
with this rare combination of elements both solid and attractive,
adapted to supply aid in graver labors and to cast a charm over vacant
hours; and but for the event of my introduction to you (which, let me
again say, I trust not to be superficially coincident with
foreshadowing needs, but providentially related thereto as stages
towards the completion of a life's plan), I should presumably have gone
on to the last without any attempt to lighten my solitariness by a
matrimonial union.

Such, my dear Miss Brooke, is the accurate statement of my feelings;
and I rely on your kind indulgence in venturing now to ask you how far
your own are of a nature to confirm my happy presentiment.  To be
accepted by you as your husband and the earthly guardian of your
welfare, I should regard as the highest of providential gifts.  In
return I can at least offer you an affection hitherto unwasted, and the
faithful consecration of a life which, however short in the sequel, has
no backward pages whereon, if you choose to turn them, you will find
records such as might justly cause you either bitterness or shame.  I
await the expression of your sentiments with an anxiety which it would
be the part of wisdom (were it possible) to divert by a more arduous
labor than usual.  But in this order of experience I am still young,
and in looking forward to an unfavorable possibility I cannot but feel
that resignation to solitude will be more difficult after the temporary
illumination of hope.

        In any case, I shall remain,
                Yours with sincere devotion,
                        EDWARD CASAUBON.


Dorothea trembled while she read this letter; then she fell on her
knees, buried her face, and sobbed.  She could not pray: under the rush
of solemn emotion in which thoughts became vague and images floated
uncertainly, she could but cast herself, with a childlike sense of
reclining, in the lap of a divine consciousness which sustained her
own.  She remained in that attitude till it was time to dress for
dinner.

How could it occur to her to examine the letter, to look at it
critically as a profession of love?  Her whole soul was possessed by
the fact that a fuller life was opening before her: she was a neophyte
about to enter on a higher grade of initiation.  She was going to have
room for the energies which stirred uneasily under the dimness and
pressure of her own ignorance and the petty peremptoriness of the
world's habits.

Now she would be able to devote herself to large yet definite duties;
now she would be allowed to live continually in the light of a mind
that she could reverence.  This hope was not unmixed with the glow of
proud delight--the joyous maiden surprise that she was chosen by the
man whom her admiration had chosen.  All Dorothea's passion was
transfused through a mind struggling towards an ideal life; the
radiance of her transfigured girlhood fell on the first object that
came within its level.  The impetus with which inclination became
resolution was heightened by those little events of the day which had
roused her discontent with the actual conditions of her life.

After dinner, when Celia was playing an "air, with variations," a small
kind of tinkling which symbolized the aesthetic part of the young
ladies' education, Dorothea went up to her room to answer Mr.
Casaubon's letter.  Why should she defer the answer?  She wrote it over
three times, not because she wished to change the wording, but because
her hand was unusually uncertain, and she could not bear that Mr.
Casaubon should think her handwriting bad and illegible.  She piqued
herself on writing a hand in which each letter was distinguishable
without any large range of conjecture, and she meant to make much use
of this accomplishment, to save Mr. Casaubon's eyes.  Three times she
wrote.

MY DEAR MR. CASAUBON,--I am very grateful to you for loving me, and
thinking me worthy to be your wife.  I can look forward to no better
happiness than that which would be one with yours.  If I said more, it
would only be the same thing written out at greater length, for I
cannot now dwell on any other thought than that I may be through life

                Yours devotedly,
                        DOROTHEA BROOKE.


Later in the evening she followed her uncle into the library to give
him the letter, that he might send it in the morning.  He was
surprised, but his surprise only issued in a few moments' silence,
during which he pushed about various objects on his writing-table, and
finally stood with his back to the fire, his glasses on his nose,
looking at the address of Dorothea's letter.

"Have you thought enough about this, my dear?" he said at last.

"There was no need to think long, uncle.  I know of nothing to make me
vacillate.  If I changed my mind, it must be because of something
important and entirely new to me."

"Ah!--then you have accepted him?  Then Chettam has no chance?  Has
Chettam offended you--offended you, you know?  What is it you don't
like in Chettam?"

"There is nothing that I like in him," said Dorothea, rather
impetuously.

Mr. Brooke threw his head and shoulders backward as if some one had
thrown a light missile at him.  Dorothea immediately felt some
self-rebuke, and said--

"I mean in the light of a husband.  He is very kind, I think--really
very good about the cottages.  A well-meaning man."

"But you must have a scholar, and that sort of thing?  Well, it lies a
little in our family.  I had it myself--that love of knowledge, and
going into everything--a little too much--it took me too far; though
that sort of thing doesn't often run in the female-line; or it runs
underground like the rivers in Greece, you know--it comes out in the
sons.  Clever sons, clever mothers.  I went a good deal into that, at
one time.  However, my dear, I have always said that people should do
as they like in these things, up to a certain point.  I couldn't, as
your guardian, have consented to a bad match.  But Casaubon stands
well: his position is good.  I am afraid Chettam will be hurt, though,
and Mrs. Cadwallader will blame me."

That evening, of course, Celia knew nothing of what had happened.  She
attributed Dorothea's abstracted manner, and the evidence of further
crying since they had got home, to the temper she had been in about Sir
James Chettam and the buildings, and was careful not to give further
offence: having once said what she wanted to say, Celia had no
disposition to recur to disagreeable subjects.  It had been her nature
when a child never to quarrel with any one--only to observe with wonder
that they quarrelled with her, and looked like turkey-cocks; whereupon
she was ready to play at cat's cradle with them whenever they recovered
themselves.  And as to Dorothea, it had always been her way to find
something wrong in her sister's words, though Celia inwardly protested
that she always said just how things were, and nothing else: she never
did and never could put words together out of her own head.  But the
best of Dodo was, that she did not keep angry for long together.  Now,
though they had hardly spoken to each other all the evening, yet when
Celia put by her work, intending to go to bed, a proceeding in which
she was always much the earlier, Dorothea, who was seated on a low
stool, unable to occupy herself except in meditation, said, with the
musical intonation which in moments of deep but quiet feeling made her
speech like a fine bit of recitative--

"Celia, dear, come and kiss me," holding her arms open as she spoke.

Celia knelt down to get the right level and gave her little butterfly
kiss, while Dorothea encircled her with gentle arms and pressed her
lips gravely on each cheek in turn.

"Don't sit up, Dodo, you are so pale to-night: go to bed soon," said
Celia, in a comfortable way, without any touch of pathos.

"No, dear, I am very, very happy," said Dorothea, fervently.

"So much the better," thought Celia.  "But how strangely Dodo goes from
one extreme to the other."

The next day, at luncheon, the butler, handing something to Mr. Brooke,
said, "Jonas is come back, sir, and has brought this letter."

Mr. Brooke read the letter, and then, nodding toward Dorothea, said,
"Casaubon, my dear: he will be here to dinner; he didn't wait to write
more--didn't wait, you know."

It could not seem remarkable to Celia that a dinner guest should be
announced to her sister beforehand, but, her eyes following the same
direction as her uncle's, she was struck with the peculiar effect of
the announcement on Dorothea.  It seemed as if something like the
reflection of a white sunlit wing had passed across her features,
ending in one of her rare blushes.  For the first time it entered into
Celia's mind that there might be something more between Mr. Casaubon
and her sister than his delight in bookish talk and her delight in
listening.  Hitherto she had classed the admiration for this "ugly" and
learned acquaintance with the admiration for Monsieur Liret at
Lausanne, also ugly and learned.  Dorothea had never been tired of
listening to old Monsieur Liret when Celia's feet were as cold as
possible, and when it had really become dreadful to see the skin of his
bald head moving about.  Why then should her enthusiasm not extend to
Mr. Casaubon simply in the same way as to Monsieur Liret?  And it
seemed probable that all learned men had a sort of schoolmaster's view
of young people.

But now Celia was really startled at the suspicion which had darted
into her mind.  She was seldom taken by surprise in this way, her
marvellous quickness in observing a certain order of signs generally
preparing her to expect such outward events as she had an interest in.
Not that she now imagined Mr. Casaubon to be already an accepted lover:
she had only begun to feel disgust at the possibility that anything in
Dorothea's mind could tend towards such an issue.  Here was something
really to vex her about Dodo: it was all very well not to accept Sir
James Chettam, but the idea of marrying Mr. Casaubon!  Celia felt a
sort of shame mingled with a sense of the ludicrous.  But perhaps Dodo,
if she were really bordering on such an extravagance, might be turned
away from it: experience had often shown that her impressibility might
be calculated on.  The day was damp, and they were not going to walk
out, so they both went up to their sitting-room; and there Celia
observed that Dorothea, instead of settling down with her usual
diligent interest to some occupation, simply leaned her elbow on an
open book and looked out of the window at the great cedar silvered with
the damp.  She herself had taken up the making of a toy for the
curate's children, and was not going to enter on any subject too
precipitately.

Dorothea was in fact thinking that it was desirable for Celia to know
of the momentous change in Mr. Casaubon's position since he had last
been in the house: it did not seem fair to leave her in ignorance of
what would necessarily affect her attitude towards him; but it was
impossible not to shrink from telling her.  Dorothea accused herself of
some meanness in this timidity: it was always odious to her to have any
small fears or contrivances about her actions, but at this moment she
was seeking the highest aid possible that she might not dread the
corrosiveness of Celia's pretty carnally minded prose.  Her reverie was
broken, and the difficulty of decision banished, by Celia's small and
rather guttural voice speaking in its usual tone, of a remark aside or
a "by the bye."

"Is any one else coming to dine besides Mr. Casaubon?"

"Not that I know of."

"I hope there is some one else.  Then I shall not hear him eat his soup
so."

"What is there remarkable about his soup-eating?"

"Really, Dodo, can't you hear how he scrapes his spoon?  And he always
blinks before he speaks.  I don't know whether Locke blinked, but I'm
sure I am sorry for those who sat opposite to him if he did."

"Celia," said Dorothea, with emphatic gravity, "pray don't make any
more observations of that kind."

"Why not?  They are quite true," returned Celia, who had her reasons
for persevering, though she was beginning to be a little afraid.

"Many things are true which only the commonest minds observe."

"Then I think the commonest minds must be rather useful.  I think it is
a pity Mr. Casaubon's mother had not a commoner mind: she might have
taught him better." Celia was inwardly frightened, and ready to run
away, now she had hurled this light javelin.

Dorothea's feelings had gathered to an avalanche, and there could be no
further preparation.

"It is right to tell you, Celia, that I am engaged to marry Mr.
Casaubon."

Perhaps Celia had never turned so pale before.  The paper man she was
making would have had his leg injured, but for her habitual care of
whatever she held in her hands.  She laid the fragile figure down at
once, and sat perfectly still for a few moments.  When she spoke there
was a tear gathering.

"Oh, Dodo, I hope you will be happy." Her sisterly tenderness could not
but surmount other feelings at this moment, and her fears were the
fears of affection.

Dorothea was still hurt and agitated.

"It is quite decided, then?" said Celia, in an awed under tone.  "And
uncle knows?"

"I have accepted Mr. Casaubon's offer.  My uncle brought me the letter
that contained it; he knew about it beforehand."

"I beg your pardon, if I have said anything to hurt you, Dodo," said
Celia, with a slight sob.  She never could have thought that she should
feel as she did.  There was something funereal in the whole affair, and
Mr. Casaubon seemed to be the officiating clergyman, about whom it
would be indecent to make remarks.

"Never mind, Kitty, do not grieve.  We should never admire the same
people.  I often offend in something of the same way; I am apt to speak
too strongly of those who don't please me."

In spite of this magnanimity Dorothea was still smarting: perhaps as
much from Celia's subdued astonishment as from her small criticisms.
Of course all the world round Tipton would be out of sympathy with this
marriage.  Dorothea knew of no one who thought as she did about life
and its best objects.

Nevertheless before the evening was at an end she was very happy.  In
an hour's tete-a-tete with Mr. Casaubon she talked to him with more
freedom than she had ever felt before, even pouring out her joy at the
thought of devoting herself to him, and of learning how she might best
share and further all his great ends.  Mr. Casaubon was touched with an
unknown delight (what man would not have been?) at this childlike
unrestrained ardor: he was not surprised (what lover would have been?)
that he should be the object of it.

"My dear young lady--Miss Brooke--Dorothea!" he said, pressing her hand
between his hands, "this is a happiness greater than I had ever
imagined to be in reserve for me.  That I should ever meet with a mind
and person so rich in the mingled graces which could render marriage
desirable, was far indeed from my conception.  You have all--nay, more
than all--those qualities which I have ever regarded as the
characteristic excellences of womanhood.  The great charm of your sex
is its capability of an ardent self-sacrificing affection, and herein
we see its fitness to round and complete the existence of our own.
Hitherto I have known few pleasures save of the severer kind: my
satisfactions have been those of the solitary student.  I have been
little disposed to gather flowers that would wither in my hand, but now
I shall pluck them with eagerness, to place them in your bosom."

No speech could have been more thoroughly honest in its intention: the
frigid rhetoric at the end was as sincere as the bark of a dog, or the
cawing of an amorous rook.  Would it not be rash to conclude that there
was no passion behind those sonnets to Delia which strike us as the
thin music of a mandolin?

Dorothea's faith supplied all that Mr. Casaubon's words seemed to leave
unsaid: what believer sees a disturbing omission or infelicity?  The
text, whether of prophet or of poet, expands for whatever we can put
into it, and even his bad grammar is sublime.

"I am very ignorant--you will quite wonder at my ignorance," said
Dorothea.  "I have so many thoughts that may be quite mistaken; and now
I shall be able to tell them all to you, and ask you about them.  But,"
she added, with rapid imagination of Mr. Casaubon's probable feeling,
"I will not trouble you too much; only when you are inclined to listen
to me.  You must often be weary with the pursuit of subjects in your
own track.  I shall gain enough if you will take me with you there."

"How should I be able now to persevere in any path without your
companionship?" said Mr. Casaubon, kissing her candid brow, and feeling
that heaven had vouchsafed him a blessing in every way suited to his
peculiar wants.  He was being unconsciously wrought upon by the charms
of a nature which was entirely without hidden calculations either for
immediate effects or for remoter ends.  It was this which made Dorothea
so childlike, and, according to some judges, so stupid, with all her
reputed cleverness; as, for example, in the present case of throwing
herself, metaphorically speaking, at Mr. Casaubon's feet, and kissing
his unfashionable shoe-ties as if he were a Protestant Pope.  She was
not in the least teaching Mr. Casaubon to ask if he were good enough
for her, but merely asking herself anxiously how she could be good
enough for Mr. Casaubon.  Before he left the next day it had been
decided that the marriage should take place within six weeks.  Why not?
Mr. Casaubon's house was ready.  It was not a parsonage, but a
considerable mansion, with much land attached to it.  The parsonage was
inhabited by the curate, who did all the duty except preaching the
morning sermon.



CHAPTER VI.

    My lady's tongue is like the meadow blades,
    That cut you stroking them with idle hand.
    Nice cutting is her function: she divides
    With spiritual edge the millet-seed,
    And makes intangible savings.


As Mr. Casaubon's carriage was passing out of the gateway, it arrested
the entrance of a pony phaeton driven by a lady with a servant seated
behind.  It was doubtful whether the recognition had been mutual, for
Mr. Casaubon was looking absently before him; but the lady was
quick-eyed, and threw a nod and a "How do you do?" in the nick of time.
In spite of her shabby bonnet and very old Indian shawl, it was plain
that the lodge-keeper regarded her as an important personage, from the
low curtsy which was dropped on the entrance of the small phaeton.

"Well, Mrs. Fitchett, how are your fowls laying now?" said the
high-colored, dark-eyed lady, with the clearest chiselled utterance.

"Pretty well for laying, madam, but they've ta'en to eating their eggs:
I've no peace o' mind with 'em at all."

"Oh, the cannibals!  Better sell them cheap at once.  What will you
sell them a couple?  One can't eat fowls of a bad character at a high
price."

"Well, madam, half-a-crown: I couldn't let 'em go, not under."

"Half-a-crown, these times!  Come now--for the Rector's chicken-broth
on a Sunday.  He has consumed all ours that I can spare.  You are half
paid with the sermon, Mrs. Fitchett, remember that.  Take a pair of
tumbler-pigeons for them--little beauties.  You must come and see them.
You have no tumblers among your pigeons."

"Well, madam, Master Fitchett shall go and see 'em after work.  He's
very hot on new sorts; to oblige you."

"Oblige me!  It will be the best bargain he ever made.  A pair of
church pigeons for a couple of wicked Spanish fowls that eat their own
eggs!  Don't you and Fitchett boast too much, that is all!"

The phaeton was driven onwards with the last words, leaving Mrs.
Fitchett laughing and shaking her head slowly, with an interjectional
"Sure_ly_, sure_ly_!"--from which it might be inferred that she would
have found the country-side somewhat duller if the Rector's lady had
been less free-spoken and less of a skinflint.  Indeed, both the
farmers and laborers in the parishes of Freshitt and Tipton would have
felt a sad lack of conversation but for the stories about what Mrs.
Cadwallader said and did: a lady of immeasurably high birth, descended,
as it were, from unknown earls, dim as the crowd of heroic shades--who
pleaded poverty, pared down prices, and cut jokes in the most
companionable manner, though with a turn of tongue that let you know
who she was.  Such a lady gave a neighborliness to both rank and
religion, and mitigated the bitterness of uncommuted tithe.  A much
more exemplary character with an infusion of sour dignity would not
have furthered their comprehension of the Thirty-nine Articles, and
would have been less socially uniting.

Mr. Brooke, seeing Mrs. Cadwallader's merits from a different point of
view, winced a little when her name was announced in the library, where
he was sitting alone.

"I see you have had our Lowick Cicero here," she said, seating herself
comfortably, throwing back her wraps, and showing a thin but well-built
figure.  "I suspect you and he are brewing some bad polities, else you
would not be seeing so much of the lively man.  I shall inform against
you: remember you are both suspicious characters since you took Peel's
side about the Catholic Bill.  I shall tell everybody that you are
going to put up for Middlemarch on the Whig side when old Pinkerton
resigns, and that Casaubon is going to help you in an underhand manner:
going to bribe the voters with pamphlets, and throw open the
public-houses to distribute them.  Come, confess!"

"Nothing of the sort," said Mr. Brooke, smiling and rubbing his
eye-glasses, but really blushing a little at the impeachment.
"Casaubon and I don't talk politics much.  He doesn't care much about
the philanthropic side of things; punishments, and that kind of thing.
He only cares about Church questions.  That is not my line of action,
you know."

"Ra-a-ther too much, my friend.  I have heard of your doings.  Who was
it that sold his bit of land to the Papists at Middlemarch?  I believe
you bought it on purpose.  You are a perfect Guy Faux.  See if you are
not burnt in effigy this 5th of November coming.  Humphrey would not
come to quarrel with you about it, so I am come."

"Very good.  I was prepared to be persecuted for not persecuting--not
persecuting, you know."

"There you go!  That is a piece of clap-trap you have got ready for the
hustings.  Now, _do not_ let them lure you to the hustings, my dear Mr.
Brooke.  A man always makes a fool of himself, speechifying: there's no
excuse but being on the right side, so that you can ask a blessing on
your humming and hawing.  You will lose yourself, I forewarn you.  You
will make a Saturday pie of all parties' opinions, and be pelted by
everybody."

"That is what I expect, you know," said Mr. Brooke, not wishing to
betray how little he enjoyed this prophetic sketch--"what I expect as
an independent man.  As to the Whigs, a man who goes with the thinkers
is not likely to be hooked on by any party.  He may go with them up to
a certain point--up to a certain point, you know.  But that is what you
ladies never understand."

"Where your certain point is?  No. I should like to be told how a man
can have any certain point when he belongs to no party--leading a
roving life, and never letting his friends know his address.  'Nobody
knows where Brooke will be--there's no counting on Brooke'--that is
what people say of you, to be quite frank.  Now, do turn respectable.
How will you like going to Sessions with everybody looking shy on you,
and you with a bad conscience and an empty pocket?"

"I don't pretend to argue with a lady on politics," said Mr. Brooke,
with an air of smiling indifference, but feeling rather unpleasantly
conscious that this attack of Mrs. Cadwallader's had opened the
defensive campaign to which certain rash steps had exposed him.  "Your
sex are not thinkers, you know--varium et mutabile semper--that kind of
thing.  You don't know Virgil.  I knew"--Mr. Brooke reflected in time
that he had not had the personal acquaintance of the Augustan poet--"I
was going to say, poor Stoddart, you know.  That was what _he_ said.
You ladies are always against an independent attitude--a man's caring
for nothing but truth, and that sort of thing.  And there is no part of
the county where opinion is narrower than it is here--I don't mean to
throw stones, you know, but somebody is wanted to take the independent
line; and if I don't take it, who will?"

"Who?  Why, any upstart who has got neither blood nor position.  People
of standing should consume their independent nonsense at home, not hawk
it about.  And you! who are going to marry your niece, as good as your
daughter, to one of our best men.  Sir James would be cruelly annoyed:
it will be too hard on him if you turn round now and make yourself a
Whig sign-board."

Mr. Brooke again winced inwardly, for Dorothea's engagement had no
sooner been decided, than he had thought of Mrs. Cadwallader's
prospective taunts.  It might have been easy for ignorant observers to
say, "Quarrel with Mrs. Cadwallader;" but where is a country gentleman
to go who quarrels with his oldest neighbors?  Who could taste the fine
flavor in the name of Brooke if it were delivered casually, like wine
without a seal?  Certainly a man can only be cosmopolitan up to a
certain point.

"I hope Chettam and I shall always be good friends; but I am sorry to
say there is no prospect of his marrying my niece," said Mr. Brooke,
much relieved to see through the window that Celia was coming in.

"Why not?" said Mrs. Cadwallader, with a sharp note of surprise.  "It
is hardly a fortnight since you and I were talking about it."

"My niece has chosen another suitor--has chosen him, you know.  I have
had nothing to do with it.  I should have preferred Chettam; and I
should have said Chettam was the man any girl would have chosen.  But
there is no accounting for these things.  Your sex is capricious, you
know."

"Why, whom do you mean to say that you are going to let her marry?"
Mrs. Cadwallader's mind was rapidly surveying the possibilities of
choice for Dorothea.

But here Celia entered, blooming from a walk in the garden, and the
greeting with her delivered Mr. Brooke from the necessity of answering
immediately.  He got up hastily, and saying, "By the way, I must speak
to Wright about the horses," shuffled quickly out of the room.

"My dear child, what is this?--this about your sister's engagement?"
said Mrs. Cadwallader.

"She is engaged to marry Mr. Casaubon," said Celia, resorting, as
usual, to the simplest statement of fact, and enjoying this opportunity
of speaking to the Rector's wife alone.

"This is frightful.  How long has it been going on?"

"I only knew of it yesterday.  They are to be married in six weeks."

"Well, my dear, I wish you joy of your brother-in-law."

"I am so sorry for Dorothea."

"Sorry!  It is her doing, I suppose."

"Yes; she says Mr. Casaubon has a great soul."

"With all my heart."

"Oh, Mrs. Cadwallader, I don't think it can be nice to marry a man with
a great soul."

"Well, my dear, take warning.  You know the look of one now; when the
next comes and wants to marry you, don't you accept him."

"I'm sure I never should."

"No; one such in a family is enough.  So your sister never cared about
Sir James Chettam?  What would you have said to _him_ for a
brother-in-law?"

"I should have liked that very much.  I am sure he would have been a
good husband.  Only," Celia added, with a slight blush (she sometimes
seemed to blush as she breathed), "I don't think he would have suited
Dorothea."

"Not high-flown enough?"

"Dodo is very strict.  She thinks so much about everything, and is so
particular about what one says.  Sir James never seemed to please her."

"She must have encouraged him, I am sure.  That is not very creditable."

"Please don't be angry with Dodo; she does not see things.  She thought
so much about the cottages, and she was rude to Sir James sometimes;
but he is so kind, he never noticed it."

"Well," said Mrs. Cadwallader, putting on her shawl, and rising, as if
in haste, "I must go straight to Sir James and break this to him.  He
will have brought his mother back by this time, and I must call.  Your
uncle will never tell him.  We are all disappointed, my dear.  Young
people should think of their families in marrying.  I set a bad
example--married a poor clergyman, and made myself a pitiable object
among the De Bracys--obliged to get my coals by stratagem, and pray to
heaven for my salad oil.  However, Casaubon has money enough; I must do
him that justice.  As to his blood, I suppose the family quarterings
are three cuttle-fish sable, and a commentator rampant.  By the bye,
before I go, my dear, I must speak to your Mrs. Carter about pastry.  I
want to send my young cook to learn of her.  Poor people with four
children, like us, you know, can't afford to keep a good cook.  I have
no doubt Mrs. Carter will oblige me.  Sir James's cook is a perfect
dragon."

In less than an hour, Mrs. Cadwallader had circumvented Mrs. Carter and
driven to Freshitt Hall, which was not far from her own parsonage, her
husband being resident in Freshitt and keeping a curate in Tipton.

Sir James Chettam had returned from the short journey which had kept
him absent for a couple of days, and had changed his dress, intending
to ride over to Tipton Grange.  His horse was standing at the door when
Mrs. Cadwallader drove up, and he immediately appeared there himself,
whip in hand.  Lady Chettam had not yet returned, but Mrs.
Cadwallader's errand could not be despatched in the presence of grooms,
so she asked to be taken into the conservatory close by, to look at the
new plants; and on coming to a contemplative stand, she said--

"I have a great shock for you; I hope you are not so far gone in love
as you pretended to be."

It was of no use protesting, against Mrs. Cadwallader's way of putting
things.  But Sir James's countenance changed a little.  He felt a vague
alarm.

"I do believe Brooke is going to expose himself after all.  I accused
him of meaning to stand for Middlemarch on the Liberal side, and he
looked silly and never denied it--talked about the independent line,
and the usual nonsense."

"Is that all?" said Sir James, much relieved.

"Why," rejoined Mrs. Cadwallader, with a sharper note, "you don't mean
to say that you would like him to turn public man in that way--making a
sort of political Cheap Jack of himself?"

"He might be dissuaded, I should think.  He would not like the expense."

"That is what I told him.  He is vulnerable to reason there--always a
few grains of common-sense in an ounce of miserliness.  Miserliness is
a capital quality to run in families; it's the safe side for madness to
dip on.  And there must be a little crack in the Brooke family, else we
should not see what we are to see."

"What?  Brooke standing for Middlemarch?"

"Worse than that.  I really feel a little responsible.  I always told
you Miss Brooke would be such a fine match.  I knew there was a great
deal of nonsense in her--a flighty sort of Methodistical stuff.  But
these things wear out of girls.  However, I am taken by surprise for
once."

"What do you mean, Mrs. Cadwallader?" said Sir James.  His fear lest
Miss Brooke should have run away to join the Moravian Brethren, or some
preposterous sect unknown to good society, was a little allayed by the
knowledge that Mrs. Cadwallader always made the worst of things.  "What
has happened to Miss Brooke?  Pray speak out."

"Very well.  She is engaged to be married." Mrs. Cadwallader paused a
few moments, observing the deeply hurt expression in her friend's face,
which he was trying to conceal by a nervous smile, while he whipped his
boot; but she soon added, "Engaged to Casaubon."

Sir James let his whip fall and stooped to pick it up.  Perhaps his
face had never before gathered so much concentrated disgust as when he
turned to Mrs. Cadwallader and repeated, "Casaubon?"

"Even so.  You know my errand now."

"Good God!  It is horrible!  He is no better than a mummy!" (The point
of view has to be allowed for, as that of a blooming and disappointed
rival.)

"She says, he is a great soul.--A great bladder for dried peas to
rattle in!" said Mrs. Cadwallader.

"What business has an old bachelor like that to marry?" said Sir James.
"He has one foot in the grave."

"He means to draw it out again, I suppose."

"Brooke ought not to allow it: he should insist on its being put off
till she is of age.  She would think better of it then.  What is a
guardian for?"

"As if you could ever squeeze a resolution out of Brooke!"

"Cadwallader might talk to him."

"Not he!  Humphrey finds everybody charming. I never can get him to
abuse Casaubon.  He will even speak well of the bishop, though I tell
him it is unnatural in a beneficed clergyman; what can one do with a
husband who attends so little to the decencies?  I hide it as well as I
can by abusing everybody myself.  Come, come, cheer up!  you are well
rid of Miss Brooke, a girl who would have been requiring you to see the
stars by daylight.  Between ourselves, little Celia is worth two of
her, and likely after all to be the better match.  For this marriage to
Casaubon is as good as going to a nunnery."

"Oh, on my own account--it is for Miss Brooke's sake I think her
friends should try to use their influence."

"Well, Humphrey doesn't know yet.  But when I tell him, you may depend
on it he will say, 'Why not?  Casaubon is a good fellow--and
young--young enough.' These charitable people never know vinegar from
wine till they have swallowed it and got the colic.  However, if I were
a man I should prefer Celia, especially when Dorothea was gone.  The
truth is, you have been courting one and have won the other.  I can see
that she admires you almost as much as a man expects to be admired.  If
it were any one but me who said so, you might think it exaggeration.
Good-by!"

Sir James handed Mrs. Cadwallader to the phaeton, and then jumped on
his horse.  He was not going to renounce his ride because of his
friend's unpleasant news--only to ride the faster in some other
direction than that of Tipton Grange.

Now, why on earth should Mrs. Cadwallader have been at all busy about
Miss Brooke's marriage; and why, when one match that she liked to think
she had a hand in was frustrated, should she have straightway contrived
the preliminaries of another?  Was there any ingenious plot, any
hide-and-seek course of action, which might be detected by a careful
telescopic watch?  Not at all: a telescope might have swept the
parishes of Tipton and Freshitt, the whole area visited by Mrs.
Cadwallader in her phaeton, without witnessing any interview that could
excite suspicion, or any scene from which she did not return with the
same unperturbed keenness of eye and the same high natural color.  In
fact, if that convenient vehicle had existed in the days of the Seven
Sages, one of them would doubtless have remarked, that you can know
little of women by following them about in their pony-phaetons. Even
with a microscope directed on a water-drop we find ourselves making
interpretations which turn out to be rather coarse; for whereas under a
weak lens you may seem to see a creature exhibiting an active voracity
into which other smaller creatures actively play as if they were so
many animated tax-pennies, a stronger lens reveals to you certain
tiniest hairlets which make vortices for these victims while the
swallower waits passively at his receipt of custom.  In this way,
metaphorically speaking, a strong lens applied to Mrs. Cadwallader's
match-making will show a play of minute causes producing what may be
called thought and speech vortices to bring her the sort of food she
needed.  Her life was rurally simple, quite free from secrets either
foul, dangerous, or otherwise important, and not consciously affected
by the great affairs of the world.  All the more did the affairs of the
great world interest her, when communicated in the letters of high-born
relations: the way in which fascinating younger sons had gone to the
dogs by marrying their mistresses; the fine old-blooded idiocy of young
Lord Tapir, and the furious gouty humors of old Lord Megatherium; the
exact crossing of genealogies which had brought a coronet into a new
branch and widened the relations of scandal,--these were topics of
which she retained details with the utmost accuracy, and reproduced
them in an excellent pickle of epigrams, which she herself enjoyed the
more because she believed as unquestionably in birth and no-birth as
she did in game and vermin.  She would never have disowned any one on
the ground of poverty: a De Bracy reduced to take his dinner in a basin
would have seemed to her an example of pathos worth exaggerating, and I
fear his aristocratic vices would not have horrified her.  But her
feeling towards the vulgar rich was a sort of religious hatred: they
had probably made all their money out of high retail prices, and Mrs.
Cadwallader detested high prices for everything that was not paid in
kind at the Rectory: such people were no part of God's design in making
the world; and their accent was an affliction to the ears.  A town
where such monsters abounded was hardly more than a sort of low comedy,
which could not be taken account of in a well-bred scheme of the
universe.  Let any lady who is inclined to be hard on Mrs. Cadwallader
inquire into the comprehensiveness of her own beautiful views, and be
quite sure that they afford accommodation for all the lives which have
the honor to coexist with hers.

With such a mind, active as phosphorus, biting everything that came
near into the form that suited it, how could Mrs. Cadwallader feel that
the Miss Brookes and their matrimonial prospects were alien to her?
especially as it had been the habit of years for her to scold Mr.
Brooke with the friendliest frankness, and let him know in confidence
that she thought him a poor creature.  From the first arrival of the
young ladies in Tipton she had prearranged Dorothea's marriage with Sir
James, and if it had taken place would have been quite sure that it was
her doing: that it should not take place after she had preconceived it,
caused her an irritation which every thinker will sympathize with.  She
was the diplomatist of Tipton and Freshitt, and for anything to happen
in spite of her was an offensive irregularity.  As to freaks like this
of Miss Brooke's, Mrs. Cadwallader had no patience with them, and now
saw that her opinion of this girl had been infected with some of her
husband's weak charitableness: those Methodistical whims, that air of
being more religious than the rector and curate together, came from a
deeper and more constitutional disease than she had been willing to
believe.

"However," said Mrs. Cadwallader, first to herself and afterwards to
her husband, "I throw her over: there was a chance, if she had married
Sir James, of her becoming a sane, sensible woman.  He would never have
contradicted her, and when a woman is not contradicted, she has no
motive for obstinacy in her absurdities.  But now I wish her joy of her
hair shirt."

It followed that Mrs. Cadwallader must decide on another match for Sir
James, and having made up her mind that it was to be the younger Miss
Brooke, there could not have been a more skilful move towards the
success of her plan than her hint to the baronet that he had made an
impression on Celia's heart.  For he was not one of those gentlemen who
languish after the unattainable Sappho's apple that laughs from the
topmost bough--the charms which

        "Smile like the knot of cowslips on the cliff,
         Not to be come at by the willing hand."

He had no sonnets to write, and it could not strike him agreeably that
he was not an object of preference to the woman whom he had preferred.
Already the knowledge that Dorothea had chosen Mr. Casaubon had bruised
his attachment and relaxed its hold.  Although Sir James was a
sportsman, he had some other feelings towards women than towards grouse
and foxes, and did not regard his future wife in the light of prey,
valuable chiefly for the excitements of the chase.  Neither was he so
well acquainted with the habits of primitive races as to feel that an
ideal combat for her, tomahawk in hand, so to speak, was necessary to
the historical continuity of the marriage-tie. On the contrary, having
the amiable vanity which knits us to those who are fond of us, and
disinclines us to those who are indifferent, and also a good grateful
nature, the mere idea that a woman had a kindness towards him spun
little threads of tenderness from out his heart towards hers.

Thus it happened, that after Sir James had ridden rather fast for half
an hour in a direction away from Tipton Grange, he slackened his pace,
and at last turned into a road which would lead him back by a shorter
cut.  Various feelings wrought in him the determination after all to go
to the Grange to-day as if nothing new had happened.  He could not help
rejoicing that he had never made the offer and been rejected; mere
friendly politeness required that he should call to see Dorothea about
the cottages, and now happily Mrs. Cadwallader had prepared him to
offer his congratulations, if necessary, without showing too much
awkwardness.  He really did not like it: giving up Dorothea was very
painful to him; but there was something in the resolve to make this
visit forthwith and conquer all show of feeling, which was a sort of
file-biting and counter-irritant. And without his distinctly
recognizing the impulse, there certainly was present in him the sense
that Celia would be there, and that he should pay her more attention
than he had done before.

We mortals, men and women, devour many a disappointment between
breakfast and dinner-time; keep back the tears and look a little pale
about the lips, and in answer to inquiries say, "Oh, nothing!" Pride
helps us; and pride is not a bad thing when it only urges us to hide
our own hurts--not to hurt others.



CHAPTER VII.

    "Piacer e popone
     Vuol la sua stagione."
            --Italian Proverb.


Mr. Casaubon, as might be expected, spent a great deal of his time at
the Grange in these weeks, and the hindrance which courtship occasioned
to the progress of his great work--the Key to all
Mythologies--naturally made him look forward the more eagerly to the
happy termination of courtship.  But he had deliberately incurred the
hindrance, having made up his mind that it was now time for him to
adorn his life with the graces of female companionship, to irradiate
the gloom which fatigue was apt to hang over the intervals of studious
labor with the play of female fancy, and to secure in this, his
culminating age, the solace of female tendance for his declining years.
Hence he determined to abandon himself to the stream of feeling, and
perhaps was surprised to find what an exceedingly shallow rill it was.
As in droughty regions baptism by immersion could only be performed
symbolically, Mr. Casaubon found that sprinkling was the utmost
approach to a plunge which his stream would afford him; and he
concluded that the poets had much exaggerated the force of masculine
passion.  Nevertheless, he observed with pleasure that Miss Brooke
showed an ardent submissive affection which promised to fulfil his most
agreeable previsions of marriage.  It had once or twice crossed his
mind that possibly there was some deficiency in Dorothea to account for
the moderation of his abandonment; but he was unable to discern the
deficiency, or to figure to himself a woman who would have pleased him
better; so that there was clearly no reason to fall back upon but the
exaggerations of human tradition.

"Could I not be preparing myself now to be more useful?" said Dorothea
to him, one morning, early in the time of courtship; "could I not learn
to read Latin and Greek aloud to you, as Milton's daughters did to
their father, without understanding what they read?"

"I fear that would be wearisome to you," said Mr. Casaubon, smiling;
"and, indeed, if I remember rightly, the young women you have mentioned
regarded that exercise in unknown tongues as a ground for rebellion
against the poet."

"Yes; but in the first place they were very naughty girls, else they
would have been proud to minister to such a father; and in the second
place they might have studied privately and taught themselves to
understand what they read, and then it would have been interesting.  I
hope you don't expect me to be naughty and stupid?"

"I expect you to be all that an exquisite young lady can be in every
possible relation of life.  Certainly it might be a great advantage if
you were able to copy the Greek character, and to that end it were well
to begin with a little reading."

Dorothea seized this as a precious permission.  She would not have
asked Mr. Casaubon at once to teach her the languages, dreading of all
things to be tiresome instead of helpful; but it was not entirely out
of devotion to her future husband that she wished to know Latin and
Greek.  Those provinces of masculine knowledge seemed to her a
standing-ground from which all truth could be seen more truly.  As it
was, she constantly doubted her own conclusions, because she felt her
own ignorance: how could she be confident that one-roomed cottages were
not for the glory of God, when men who knew the classics appeared to
conciliate indifference to the cottages with zeal for the glory?
Perhaps even Hebrew might be necessary--at least the alphabet and a few
roots--in order to arrive at the core of things, and judge soundly on
the social duties of the Christian.  And she had not reached that point
of renunciation at which she would have been satisfied with having a
wise husband: she wished, poor child, to be wise herself.  Miss Brooke
was certainly very naive with all her alleged cleverness.  Celia, whose
mind had never been thought too powerful, saw the emptiness of other
people's pretensions much more readily.  To have in general but little
feeling, seems to be the only security against feeling too much on any
particular occasion.

However, Mr. Casaubon consented to listen and teach for an hour
together, like a schoolmaster of little boys, or rather like a lover,
to whom a mistress's elementary ignorance and difficulties have a
touching fitness.  Few scholars would have disliked teaching the
alphabet under such circumstances.  But Dorothea herself was a little
shocked and discouraged at her own stupidity, and the answers she got
to some timid questions about the value of the Greek accents gave her a
painful suspicion that here indeed there might be secrets not capable
of explanation to a woman's reason.

Mr. Brooke had no doubt on that point, and expressed himself with his
usual strength upon it one day that he came into the library while the
reading was going forward.

"Well, but now, Casaubon, such deep studies, classics, mathematics,
that kind of thing, are too taxing for a woman--too taxing, you know."

"Dorothea is learning to read the characters simply," said Mr.
Casaubon, evading the question.  "She had the very considerate thought
of saving my eyes."

"Ah, well, without understanding, you know--that may not be so bad.
But there is a lightness about the feminine mind--a touch and
go--music, the fine arts, that kind of thing--they should study those
up to a certain point, women should; but in a light way, you know.  A
woman should be able to sit down and play you or sing you a good old
English tune.  That is what I like; though I have heard most
things--been at the opera in Vienna: Gluck, Mozart, everything of that
sort.  But I'm a conservative in music--it's not like ideas, you know.
I stick to the good old tunes."

"Mr. Casaubon is not fond of the piano, and I am very glad he is not,"
said Dorothea, whose slight regard for domestic music and feminine fine
art must be forgiven her, considering the small tinkling and smearing
in which they chiefly consisted at that dark period.  She smiled and
looked up at her betrothed with grateful eyes.  If he had always been
asking her to play the "Last Rose of Summer," she would have required
much resignation.  "He says there is only an old harpsichord at Lowick,
and it is covered with books."

"Ah, there you are behind Celia, my dear.  Celia, now, plays very
prettily, and is always ready to play.  However, since Casaubon does
not like it, you are all right.  But it's a pity you should not have
little recreations of that sort, Casaubon: the bow always strung--that
kind of thing, you know--will not do."

"I never could look on it in the light of a recreation to have my ears
teased with measured noises," said Mr. Casaubon.  "A tune much iterated
has the ridiculous effect of making the words in my mind perform a sort
of minuet to keep time--an effect hardly tolerable, I imagine, after
boyhood.  As to the grander forms of music, worthy to accompany solemn
celebrations, and even to serve as an educating influence according to
the ancient conception, I say nothing, for with these we are not
immediately concerned."

"No; but music of that sort I should enjoy," said Dorothea.  "When we
were coming home from Lausanne my uncle took us to hear the great organ
at Freiberg, and it made me sob."

"That kind of thing is not healthy, my dear," said Mr. Brooke.
"Casaubon, she will be in your hands now: you must teach my niece to
take things more quietly, eh, Dorothea?"

He ended with a smile, not wishing to hurt his niece, but really
thinking that it was perhaps better for her to be early married to so
sober a fellow as Casaubon, since she would not hear of Chettam.

"It is wonderful, though," he said to himself as he shuffled out of the
room--"it is wonderful that she should have liked him.  However, the
match is good.  I should have been travelling out of my brief to have
hindered it, let Mrs. Cadwallader say what she will.  He is pretty
certain to be a bishop, is Casaubon.  That was a very seasonable
pamphlet of his on the Catholic Question:--a deanery at least.  They
owe him a deanery."

And here I must vindicate a claim to philosophical reflectiveness, by
remarking that Mr. Brooke on this occasion little thought of the
Radical speech which, at a later period, he was led to make on the
incomes of the bishops.  What elegant historian would neglect a
striking opportunity for pointing out that his heroes did not foresee
the history of the world, or even their own actions?--For example, that
Henry of Navarre, when a Protestant baby, little thought of being a
Catholic monarch; or that Alfred the Great, when he measured his
laborious nights with burning candles, had no idea of future gentlemen
measuring their idle days with watches.  Here is a mine of truth,
which, however vigorously it may be worked, is likely to outlast our
coal.

But of Mr. Brooke I make a further remark perhaps less warranted by
precedent--namely, that if he had foreknown his speech, it might not
have made any great difference.  To think with pleasure of his niece's
husband having a large ecclesiastical income was one thing--to make a
Liberal speech was another thing; and it is a narrow mind which cannot
look at a subject from various points of view.



CHAPTER VIII.

    "Oh, rescue her!  I am her brother now,
     And you her father.  Every gentle maid
     Should have a guardian in each gentleman."


It was wonderful to Sir James Chettam how well he continued to like
going to the Grange after he had once encountered the difficulty of
seeing Dorothea for the first time in the light of a woman who was
engaged to another man.  Of course the forked lightning seemed to pass
through him when he first approached her, and he remained conscious
throughout the interview of hiding uneasiness; but, good as he was, it
must be owned that his uneasiness was less than it would have been if
he had thought his rival a brilliant and desirable match.  He had no
sense of being eclipsed by Mr. Casaubon; he was only shocked that
Dorothea was under a melancholy illusion, and his mortification lost
some of its bitterness by being mingled with compassion.

Nevertheless, while Sir James said to himself that he had completely
resigned her, since with the perversity of a Desdemona she had not
affected a proposed match that was clearly suitable and according to
nature; he could not yet be quite passive under the idea of her
engagement to Mr. Casaubon.  On the day when he first saw them together
in the light of his present knowledge, it seemed to him that he had not
taken the affair seriously enough.  Brooke was really culpable; he
ought to have hindered it.  Who could speak to him?  Something might be
done perhaps even now, at least to defer the marriage.  On his way home
he turned into the Rectory and asked for Mr. Cadwallader.  Happily, the
Rector was at home, and his visitor was shown into the study, where all
the fishing tackle hung.  But he himself was in a little room
adjoining, at work with his turning apparatus, and he called to the
baronet to join him there.  The two were better friends than any other
landholder and clergyman in the county--a significant fact which was in
agreement with the amiable expression of their faces.

Mr. Cadwallader was a large man, with full lips and a sweet smile; very
plain and rough in his exterior, but with that solid imperturbable ease
and good-humor which is infectious, and like great grassy hills in the
sunshine, quiets even an irritated egoism, and makes it rather ashamed
of itself.  "Well, how are you?" he said, showing a hand not quite fit
to be grasped.  "Sorry I missed you before.  Is there anything
particular?  You look vexed."

Sir James's brow had a little crease in it, a little depression of the
eyebrow, which he seemed purposely to exaggerate as he answered.

"It is only this conduct of Brooke's. I really think somebody should
speak to him."

"What? meaning to stand?" said Mr. Cadwallader, going on with the
arrangement of the reels which he had just been turning.  "I hardly
think he means it.  But where's the harm, if he likes it?  Any one who
objects to Whiggery should be glad when the Whigs don't put up the
strongest fellow.  They won't overturn the Constitution with our friend
Brooke's head for a battering ram."

"Oh, I don't mean that," said Sir James, who, after putting down his
hat and throwing himself into a chair, had begun to nurse his leg and
examine the sole of his boot with much bitterness.  "I mean this
marriage.  I mean his letting that blooming young girl marry Casaubon."

"What is the matter with Casaubon?  I see no harm in him--if the girl
likes him."

"She is too young to know what she likes.  Her guardian ought to
interfere.  He ought not to allow the thing to be done in this headlong
manner.  I wonder a man like you, Cadwallader--a man with daughters,
can look at the affair with indifference: and with such a heart as
yours!  Do think seriously about it."

"I am not joking; I am as serious as possible," said the Rector, with a
provoking little inward laugh.  "You are as bad as Elinor.  She has
been wanting me to go and lecture Brooke; and I have reminded her that
her friends had a very poor opinion of the match she made when she
married me."

"But look at Casaubon," said Sir James, indignantly.  "He must be
fifty, and I don't believe he could ever have been much more than the
shadow of a man.  Look at his legs!"

"Confound you handsome young fellows! you think of having it all your
own way in the world.  You don't under stand women.  They don't admire
you half so much as you admire yourselves.  Elinor used to tell her
sisters that she married me for my ugliness--it was so various and
amusing that it had quite conquered her prudence."

"You! it was easy enough for a woman to love you.  But this is no
question of beauty.  I don't _like_ Casaubon." This was Sir James's
strongest way of implying that he thought ill of a man's character.

"Why? what do you know against him?" said the Rector laying down his
reels, and putting his thumbs into his armholes with an air of
attention.

Sir James paused.  He did not usually find it easy to give his reasons:
it seemed to him strange that people should not know them without being
told, since he only felt what was reasonable.  At last he said--

"Now, Cadwallader, has he got any heart?"

"Well, yes.  I don't mean of the melting sort, but a sound kernel,
_that_ you may be sure of.  He is very good to his poor relations:
pensions several of the women, and is educating a young fellow at a
good deal of expense.  Casaubon acts up to his sense of justice.  His
mother's sister made a bad match--a Pole, I think--lost herself--at any
rate was disowned by her family.  If it had not been for that, Casaubon
would not have had so much money by half.  I believe he went himself to
find out his cousins, and see what he could do for them.  Every man
would not ring so well as that, if you tried his metal.  _You_ would,
Chettam; but not every man."

"I don't know," said Sir James, coloring.  "I am not so sure of
myself." He paused a moment, and then added, "That was a right thing
for Casaubon to do.  But a man may wish to do what is right, and yet be
a sort of parchment code.  A woman may not be happy with him.  And I
think when a girl is so young as Miss Brooke is, her friends ought to
interfere a little to hinder her from doing anything foolish.  You
laugh, because you fancy I have some feeling on my own account.  But
upon my honor, it is not that.  I should feel just the same if I were
Miss Brooke's brother or uncle."

"Well, but what should you do?"

"I should say that the marriage must not be decided on until she was of
age.  And depend upon it, in that case, it would never come off.  I
wish you saw it as I do--I wish you would talk to Brooke about it."

Sir James rose as he was finishing his sentence, for he saw Mrs.
Cadwallader entering from the study.  She held by the hand her youngest
girl, about five years old, who immediately ran to papa, and was made
comfortable on his knee.

"I hear what you are talking about," said the wife.  "But you will make
no impression on Humphrey.  As long as the fish rise to his bait,
everybody is what he ought to be.  Bless you, Casaubon has got a
trout-stream, and does not care about fishing in it himself: could
there be a better fellow?"

"Well, there is something in that," said the Rector, with his quiet,
inward laugh.  "It is a very good quality in a man to have a
trout-stream."

"But seriously," said Sir James, whose vexation had not yet spent
itself, "don't you think the Rector might do some good by speaking?"

"Oh, I told you beforehand what he would say," answered Mrs.
Cadwallader, lifting up her eyebrows.  "I have done what I could: I
wash my hands of the marriage."

"In the first place," said the Rector, looking rather grave, "it would
be nonsensical to expect that I could convince Brooke, and make him act
accordingly.  Brooke is a very good fellow, but pulpy; he will run into
any mould, but he won't keep shape."

"He might keep shape long enough to defer the marriage," said Sir James.

"But, my dear Chettam, why should I use my influence to Casaubon's
disadvantage, unless I were much surer than I am that I should be
acting for the advantage of Miss Brooke?  I know no harm of Casaubon.
I don't care about his Xisuthrus and Fee-fo-fum and the rest; but then
he doesn't care about my fishing-tackle. As to the line he took on the
Catholic Question, that was unexpected; but he has always been civil to
me, and I don't see why I should spoil his sport.  For anything I can
tell, Miss Brooke may be happier with him than she would be with any
other man."

"Humphrey!  I have no patience with you.  You know you would rather
dine under the hedge than with Casaubon alone.  You have nothing to say
to each other."

"What has that to do with Miss Brooke's marrying him?  She does not do
it for my amusement."

"He has got no good red blood in his body," said Sir James.

"No. Somebody put a drop under a magnifying-glass and it was all
semicolons and parentheses," said Mrs. Cadwallader.

"Why does he not bring out his book, instead of marrying," said Sir
James, with a disgust which he held warranted by the sound feeling of
an English layman.

"Oh, he dreams footnotes, and they run away with all his brains.  They
say, when he was a little boy, he made an abstract of 'Hop o' my
Thumb,' and he has been making abstracts ever since.  Ugh!  And that is
the man Humphrey goes on saying that a woman may be happy with."

"Well, he is what Miss Brooke likes," said the Rector.  "I don't
profess to understand every young lady's taste."

"But if she were your own daughter?" said Sir James.

"That would be a different affair.  She is _not_ my daughter, and I
don't feel called upon to interfere.  Casaubon is as good as most of
us.  He is a scholarly clergyman, and creditable to the cloth.  Some
Radical fellow speechifying at Middlemarch said Casaubon was the
learned straw-chopping incumbent, and Freke was the brick-and-mortar
incumbent, and I was the angling incumbent.  And upon my word, I don't
see that one is worse or better than the other." The Rector ended with
his silent laugh.  He always saw the joke of any satire against
himself.  His conscience was large and easy, like the rest of him: it
did only what it could do without any trouble.

Clearly, there would be no interference with Miss Brooke's marriage
through Mr. Cadwallader; and Sir James felt with some sadness that she
was to have perfect liberty of misjudgment.  It was a sign of his good
disposition that he did not slacken at all in his intention of carrying
out Dorothea's design of the cottages.  Doubtless this persistence was
the best course for his own dignity: but pride only helps us to be
generous; it never makes us so, any more than vanity makes us witty.
She was now enough aware of Sir James's position with regard to her, to
appreciate the rectitude of his perseverance in a landlord's duty, to
which he had at first been urged by a lover's complaisance, and her
pleasure in it was great enough to count for something even in her
present happiness.  Perhaps she gave to Sir James Chettam's cottages
all the interest she could spare from Mr. Casaubon, or rather from the
symphony of hopeful dreams, admiring trust, and passionate self
devotion which that learned gentleman had set playing in her soul.
Hence it happened that in the good baronet's succeeding visits, while
he was beginning to pay small attentions to Celia, he found himself
talking with more and more pleasure to Dorothea.  She was perfectly
unconstrained and without irritation towards him now, and he was
gradually discovering the delight there is in frank kindness and
companionship between a man and a woman who have no passion to hide or
confess.



CHAPTER IX.

    1st Gent. An ancient land in ancient oracles
                 Is called "law-thirsty": all the struggle there
                 Was after order and a perfect rule.
                 Pray, where lie such lands now? . . .
    2d Gent.  Why, where they lay of old--in human souls.


Mr. Casaubon's behavior about settlements was highly satisfactory to
Mr. Brooke, and the preliminaries of marriage rolled smoothly along,
shortening the weeks of courtship.  The betrothed bride must see her
future home, and dictate any changes that she would like to have made
there.  A woman dictates before marriage in order that she may have an
appetite for submission afterwards.  And certainly, the mistakes that
we male and female mortals make when we have our own way might fairly
raise some wonder that we are so fond of it.

On a gray but dry November morning Dorothea drove to Lowick in company
with her uncle and Celia.  Mr. Casaubon's home was the manor-house.
Close by, visible from some parts of the garden, was the little church,
with the old parsonage opposite.  In the beginning of his career, Mr.
Casaubon had only held the living, but the death of his brother had put
him in possession of the manor also.  It had a small park, with a fine
old oak here and there, and an avenue of limes towards the southwest
front, with a sunk fence between park and pleasure-ground, so that from
the drawing-room windows the glance swept uninterruptedly along a slope
of greensward till the limes ended in a level of corn and pastures,
which often seemed to melt into a lake under the setting sun.  This was
the happy side of the house, for the south and east looked rather
melancholy even under the brightest morning.  The grounds here were
more confined, the flower-beds showed no very careful tendance, and
large clumps of trees, chiefly of sombre yews, had risen high, not ten
yards from the windows.  The building, of greenish stone, was in the
old English style, not ugly, but small-windowed and melancholy-looking:
the sort of house that must have children, many flowers, open windows,
and little vistas of bright things, to make it seem a joyous home.  In
this latter end of autumn, with a sparse remnant of yellow leaves
falling slowly athwart the dark evergreens in a stillness without
sunshine, the house too had an air of autumnal decline, and Mr.
Casaubon, when he presented himself, had no bloom that could be thrown
into relief by that background.

"Oh dear!" Celia said to herself, "I am sure Freshitt Hall would have
been pleasanter than this." She thought of the white freestone, the
pillared portico, and the terrace full of flowers, Sir James smiling
above them like a prince issuing from his enchantment in a rose-bush,
with a handkerchief swiftly metamorphosed from the most delicately
odorous petals--Sir James, who talked so agreeably, always about things
which had common-sense in them, and not about learning!  Celia had
those light young feminine tastes which grave and weatherworn gentlemen
sometimes prefer in a wife; but happily Mr. Casaubon's bias had been
different, for he would have had no chance with Celia.

Dorothea, on the contrary, found the house and grounds all that she
could wish: the dark book-shelves in the long library, the carpets and
curtains with colors subdued by time, the curious old maps and
bird's-eye views on the walls of the corridor, with here and there an
old vase below, had no oppression for her, and seemed more cheerful
than the easts and pictures at the Grange, which her uncle had long ago
brought home from his travels--they being probably among the ideas he
had taken in at one time.  To poor Dorothea these severe classical
nudities and smirking Renaissance-Correggiosities were painfully
inexplicable, staring into the midst of her Puritanic conceptions: she
had never been taught how she could bring them into any sort of
relevance with her life.  But the owners of Lowick apparently had not
been travellers, and Mr. Casaubon's studies of the past were not
carried on by means of such aids.

Dorothea walked about the house with delightful emotion.  Everything
seemed hallowed to her: this was to be the home of her wifehood, and
she looked up with eyes full of confidence to Mr. Casaubon when he drew
her attention specially to some actual arrangement and asked her if she
would like an alteration.  All appeals to her taste she met gratefully,
but saw nothing to alter.  His efforts at exact courtesy and formal
tenderness had no defect for her.  She filled up all blanks with
unmanifested perfections, interpreting him as she interpreted the works
of Providence, and accounting for seeming discords by her own deafness
to the higher harmonies.  And there are many blanks left in the weeks
of courtship which a loving faith fills with happy assurance.

"Now, my dear Dorothea, I wish you to favor me by pointing out which
room you would like to have as your boudoir," said Mr. Casaubon,
showing that his views of the womanly nature were sufficiently large to
include that requirement.

"It is very kind of you to think of that," said Dorothea, "but I assure
you I would rather have all those matters decided for me.  I shall be
much happier to take everything as it is--just as you have been used to
have it, or as you will yourself choose it to be.  I have no motive for
wishing anything else."

"Oh, Dodo," said Celia, "will you not have the bow-windowed room
up-stairs?"

Mr. Casaubon led the way thither.  The bow-window looked down the
avenue of limes; the furniture was all of a faded blue, and there were
miniatures of ladies and gentlemen with powdered hair hanging in a
group.  A piece of tapestry over a door also showed a blue-green world
with a pale stag in it.  The chairs and tables were thin-legged and
easy to upset.  It was a room where one might fancy the ghost of a
tight-laced lady revisiting the scene of her embroidery.  A light
bookcase contained duodecimo volumes of polite literature in calf,
completing the furniture.

"Yes," said Mr. Brooke, "this would be a pretty room with some new
hangings, sofas, and that sort of thing.  A little bare now."

"No, uncle," said Dorothea, eagerly.  "Pray do not speak of altering
anything.  There are so many other things in the world that want
altering--I like to take these things as they are.  And you like them
as they are, don't you?" she added, looking at Mr. Casaubon.  "Perhaps
this was your mother's room when she was young."

"It was," he said, with his slow bend of the head.

"This is your mother," said Dorothea, who had turned to examine the
group of miniatures.  "It is like the tiny one you brought me; only, I
should think, a better portrait.  And this one opposite, who is this?"

"Her elder sister.  They were, like you and your sister, the only two
children of their parents, who hang above them, you see."

"The sister is pretty," said Celia, implying that she thought less
favorably of Mr. Casaubon's mother.  It was a new opening to Celia's
imagination, that he came of a family who had all been young in their
time--the ladies wearing necklaces.

"It is a peculiar face," said Dorothea, looking closely.  "Those deep
gray eyes rather near together--and the delicate irregular nose with a
sort of ripple in it--and all the powdered curls hanging backward.
Altogether it seems to me peculiar rather than pretty.  There is not
even a family likeness between her and your mother."

"No. And they were not alike in their lot."

"You did not mention her to me," said Dorothea.

"My aunt made an unfortunate marriage.  I never saw her."

Dorothea wondered a little, but felt that it would be indelicate just
then to ask for any information which Mr. Casaubon did not proffer, and
she turned to the window to admire the view.  The sun had lately
pierced the gray, and the avenue of limes cast shadows.

"Shall we not walk in the garden now?" said Dorothea.

"And you would like to see the church, you know," said Mr. Brooke.  "It
is a droll little church.  And the village.  It all lies in a
nut-shell. By the way, it will suit you, Dorothea; for the cottages are
like a row of alms-houses--little gardens, gilly-flowers, that sort of
thing."

"Yes, please," said Dorothea, looking at Mr. Casaubon, "I should like
to see all that." She had got nothing from him more graphic about the
Lowick cottages than that they were "not bad."

They were soon on a gravel walk which led chiefly between grassy
borders and clumps of trees, this being the nearest way to the church,
Mr. Casaubon said.  At the little gate leading into the churchyard
there was a pause while Mr. Casaubon went to the parsonage close by to
fetch a key.  Celia, who had been hanging a little in the rear, came up
presently, when she saw that Mr. Casaubon was gone away, and said in
her easy staccato, which always seemed to contradict the suspicion of
any malicious intent--

"Do you know, Dorothea, I saw some one quite young coming up one of the
walks."

"Is that astonishing, Celia?"

"There may be a young gardener, you know--why not?" said Mr. Brooke.
"I told Casaubon he should change his gardener."

"No, not a gardener," said Celia; "a gentleman with a sketch-book. He
had light-brown curls.  I only saw his back.  But he was quite young."

"The curate's son, perhaps," said Mr. Brooke.  "Ah, there is Casaubon
again, and Tucker with him.  He is going to introduce Tucker.  You
don't know Tucker yet."

Mr. Tucker was the middle-aged curate, one of the "inferior clergy,"
who are usually not wanting in sons.  But after the introduction, the
conversation did not lead to any question about his family, and the
startling apparition of youthfulness was forgotten by every one but
Celia.  She inwardly declined to believe that the light-brown curls and
slim figure could have any relationship to Mr. Tucker, who was just as
old and musty-looking as she would have expected Mr. Casaubon's curate
to be; doubtless an excellent man who would go to heaven (for Celia
wished not to be unprincipled), but the corners of his mouth were so
unpleasant.  Celia thought with some dismalness of the time she should
have to spend as bridesmaid at Lowick, while the curate had probably no
pretty little children whom she could like, irrespective of principle.

Mr. Tucker was invaluable in their walk; and perhaps Mr. Casaubon had
not been without foresight on this head, the curate being able to
answer all Dorothea's questions about the villagers and the other
parishioners.  Everybody, he assured her, was well off in Lowick: not a
cottager in those double cottages at a low rent but kept a pig, and the
strips of garden at the back were well tended.  The small boys wore
excellent corduroy, the girls went out as tidy servants, or did a
little straw-plaiting at home: no looms here, no Dissent; and though
the public disposition was rather towards laying by money than towards
spirituality, there was not much vice.  The speckled fowls were so
numerous that Mr. Brooke observed, "Your farmers leave some barley for
the women to glean, I see.  The poor folks here might have a fowl in
their pot, as the good French king used to wish for all his people.
The French eat a good many fowls--skinny fowls, you know."

"I think it was a very cheap wish of his," said Dorothea, indignantly.
"Are kings such monsters that a wish like that must be reckoned a royal
virtue?"

"And if he wished them a skinny fowl," said Celia, "that would not be
nice.  But perhaps he wished them to have fat fowls."

"Yes, but the word has dropped out of the text, or perhaps was
subauditum; that is, present in the king's mind, but not uttered," said
Mr. Casaubon, smiling and bending his head towards Celia, who
immediately dropped backward a little, because she could not bear Mr.
Casaubon to blink at her.

Dorothea sank into silence on the way back to the house.  She felt some
disappointment, of which she was yet ashamed, that there was nothing
for her to do in Lowick; and in the next few minutes her mind had
glanced over the possibility, which she would have preferred, of
finding that her home would be in a parish which had a larger share of
the world's misery, so that she might have had more active duties in
it.  Then, recurring to the future actually before her, she made a
picture of more complete devotion to Mr. Casaubon's aims in which she
would await new duties.  Many such might reveal themselves to the
higher knowledge gained by her in that companionship.

Mr. Tucker soon left them, having some clerical work which would not
allow him to lunch at the Hall; and as they were re-entering the garden
through the little gate, Mr. Casaubon said--

"You seem a little sad, Dorothea.  I trust you are pleased with what
you have seen."

"I am feeling something which is perhaps foolish and wrong," answered
Dorothea, with her usual openness--"almost wishing that the people
wanted more to be done for them here.  I have known so few ways of
making my life good for anything.  Of course, my notions of usefulness
must be narrow.  I must learn new ways of helping people."

"Doubtless," said Mr. Casaubon.  "Each position has its corresponding
duties.  Yours, I trust, as the mistress of Lowick, will not leave any
yearning unfulfilled."

"Indeed, I believe that," said Dorothea, earnestly.  "Do not suppose
that I am sad."

"That is well.  But, if you are not tired, we will take another way to
the house than that by which we came."

Dorothea was not at all tired, and a little circuit was made towards a
fine yew-tree, the chief hereditary glory of the grounds on this side
of the house.  As they approached it, a figure, conspicuous on a dark
background of evergreens, was seated on a bench, sketching the old
tree.  Mr. Brooke, who was walking in front with Celia, turned his
head, and said--

"Who is that youngster, Casaubon?"

They had come very near when Mr. Casaubon answered--

"That is a young relative of mine, a second cousin: the grandson, in
fact," he added, looking at Dorothea, "of the lady whose portrait you
have been noticing, my aunt Julia."

The young man had laid down his sketch-book and risen.  His bushy
light-brown curls, as well as his youthfulness, identified him at once
with Celia's apparition.

"Dorothea, let me introduce to you my cousin, Mr. Ladislaw.  Will, this
is Miss Brooke."

The cousin was so close now, that, when he lifted his hat, Dorothea
could see a pair of gray eyes rather near together, a delicate
irregular nose with a little ripple in it, and hair falling backward;
but there was a mouth and chin of a more prominent, threatening aspect
than belonged to the type of the grandmother's miniature.  Young
Ladislaw did not feel it necessary to smile, as if he were charmed with
this introduction to his future second cousin and her relatives; but
wore rather a pouting air of discontent.

"You are an artist, I see," said Mr. Brooke, taking up the sketch-book
and turning it over in his unceremonious fashion.

"No, I only sketch a little.  There is nothing fit to be seen there,"
said young Ladislaw, coloring, perhaps with temper rather than modesty.

"Oh, come, this is a nice bit, now.  I did a little in this way myself
at one time, you know.  Look here, now; this is what I call a nice
thing, done with what we used to call _brio_." Mr. Brooke held out
towards the two girls a large colored sketch of stony ground and trees,
with a pool.

"I am no judge of these things," said Dorothea, not coldly, but with an
eager deprecation of the appeal to her.  "You know, uncle, I never see
the beauty of those pictures which you say are so much praised.  They
are a language I do not understand.  I suppose there is some relation
between pictures and nature which I am too ignorant to feel--just as
you see what a Greek sentence stands for which means nothing to me."
Dorothea looked up at Mr. Casaubon, who bowed his head towards her,
while Mr. Brooke said, smiling nonchalantly--

"Bless me, now, how different people are!  But you had a bad style of
teaching, you know--else this is just the thing for girls--sketching,
fine art and so on.  But you took to drawing plans; you don't
understand morbidezza, and that kind of thing.  You will come to my
house, I hope, and I will show you what I did in this way," he
continued, turning to young Ladislaw, who had to be recalled from his
preoccupation in observing Dorothea.  Ladislaw had made up his mind
that she must be an unpleasant girl, since she was going to marry
Casaubon, and what she said of her stupidity about pictures would have
confirmed that opinion even if he had believed her.  As it was, he took
her words for a covert judgment, and was certain that she thought his
sketch detestable.  There was too much cleverness in her apology: she
was laughing both at her uncle and himself.  But what a voice!  It was
like the voice of a soul that had once lived in an Aeolian harp.  This
must be one of Nature's inconsistencies.  There could be no sort of
passion in a girl who would marry Casaubon.  But he turned from her,
and bowed his thanks for Mr. Brooke's invitation.

"We will turn over my Italian engravings together," continued that
good-natured man.  "I have no end of those things, that I have laid by
for years.  One gets rusty in this part of the country, you know.  Not
you, Casaubon; you stick to your studies; but my best ideas get
undermost--out of use, you know.  You clever young men must guard
against indolence.  I was too indolent, you know: else I might have
been anywhere at one time."

"That is a seasonable admonition," said Mr. Casaubon; "but now we will
pass on to the house, lest the young ladies should be tired of
standing."

When their backs were turned, young Ladislaw sat down to go on with his
sketching, and as he did so his face broke into an expression of
amusement which increased as he went on drawing, till at last he threw
back his head and laughed aloud.  Partly it was the reception of his
own artistic production that tickled him; partly the notion of his
grave cousin as the lover of that girl; and partly Mr. Brooke's
definition of the place he might have held but for the impediment of
indolence.  Mr. Will Ladislaw's sense of the ludicrous lit up his
features very agreeably: it was the pure enjoyment of comicality, and
had no mixture of sneering and self-exaltation.

"What is your nephew going to do with himself, Casaubon?" said Mr.
Brooke, as they went on.

"My cousin, you mean--not my nephew."

"Yes, yes, cousin.  But in the way of a career, you know."

"The answer to that question is painfully doubtful.  On leaving Rugby
he declined to go to an English university, where I would gladly have
placed him, and chose what I must consider the anomalous course of
studying at Heidelberg.  And now he wants to go abroad again, without
any special object, save the vague purpose of what he calls culture,
preparation for he knows not what.  He declines to choose a profession."

"He has no means but what you furnish, I suppose."

"I have always given him and his friends reason to understand that I
would furnish in moderation what was necessary for providing him with a
scholarly education, and launching him respectably.  I am-therefore
bound to fulfil the expectation so raised," said Mr. Casaubon, putting
his conduct in the light of mere rectitude: a trait of delicacy which
Dorothea noticed with admiration.

"He has a thirst for travelling; perhaps he may turn out a Bruce or a
Mungo Park," said Mr. Brooke.  "I had a notion of that myself at one
time."

"No, he has no bent towards exploration, or the enlargement of our
geognosis: that would be a special purpose which I could recognize with
some approbation, though without felicitating him on a career which so
often ends in premature and violent death.  But so far is he from
having any desire for a more accurate knowledge of the earth's surface,
that he said he should prefer not to know the sources of the Nile, and
that there should be some unknown regions preserved as hunting grounds
for the poetic imagination."

"Well, there is something in that, you know," said Mr. Brooke, who had
certainly an impartial mind.

"It is, I fear, nothing more than a part of his general inaccuracy and
indisposition to thoroughness of all kinds, which would be a bad augury
for him in any profession, civil or sacred, even were he so far
submissive to ordinary rule as to choose one."

"Perhaps he has conscientious scruples founded on his own unfitness,"
said Dorothea, who was interesting herself in finding a favorable
explanation.  "Because the law and medicine should be very serious
professions to undertake, should they not? People's lives and fortunes
depend on them."

"Doubtless; but I fear that my young relative Will Ladislaw is chiefly
determined in his aversion to these callings by a dislike to steady
application, and to that kind of acquirement which is needful
instrumentally, but is not charming or immediately inviting to
self-indulgent taste.  I have insisted to him on what Aristotle has
stated with admirable brevity, that for the achievement of any work
regarded as an end there must be a prior exercise of many energies or
acquired facilities of a secondary order, demanding patience.  I have
pointed to my own manuscript volumes, which represent the toil of years
preparatory to a work not yet accomplished.  But in vain.  To careful
reasoning of this kind he replies by calling himself Pegasus, and every
form of prescribed work 'harness.'"

Celia laughed.  She was surprised to find that Mr. Casaubon could say
something quite amusing.

"Well, you know, he may turn out a Byron, a Chatterton, a
Churchill--that sort of thing--there's no telling," said Mr. Brooke.
"Shall you let him go to Italy, or wherever else he wants to go?"

"Yes; I have agreed to furnish him with moderate supplies for a year or
so; he asks no more.  I shall let him be tried by the test of freedom."

"That is very kind of you," said Dorothea, looking up at Mr. Casaubon
with delight.  "It is noble.  After all, people may really have in them
some vocation which is not quite plain to themselves, may they not?
They may seem idle and weak because they are growing.  We should be
very patient with each other, I think."

"I suppose it is being engaged to be married that has made you think
patience good," said Celia, as soon as she and Dorothea were alone
together, taking off their wrappings.

"You mean that I am very impatient, Celia."

"Yes; when people don't do and say just what you like." Celia had
become less afraid of "saying things" to Dorothea since this
engagement: cleverness seemed to her more pitiable than ever.



CHAPTER X.

    "He had catched a great cold, had he had no other clothes
     to wear than the skin of a bear not yet killed."--FULLER.


Young Ladislaw did not pay that visit to which Mr. Brooke had invited
him, and only six days afterwards Mr. Casaubon mentioned that his young
relative had started for the Continent, seeming by this cold vagueness
to waive inquiry.  Indeed, Will had declined to fix on any more precise
destination than the entire area of Europe.  Genius, he held, is
necessarily intolerant of fetters: on the one hand it must have the
utmost play for its spontaneity; on the other, it may confidently await
those messages from the universe which summon it to its peculiar work,
only placing itself in an attitude of receptivity towards all sublime
chances.  The attitudes of receptivity are various, and Will had
sincerely tried many of them.  He was not excessively fond of wine, but
he had several times taken too much, simply as an experiment in that
form of ecstasy; he had fasted till he was faint, and then supped on
lobster; he had made himself ill with doses of opium.  Nothing greatly
original had resulted from these measures; and the effects of the opium
had convinced him that there was an entire dissimilarity between his
constitution and De Quincey's. The superadded circumstance which would
evolve the genius had not yet come; the universe had not yet beckoned.
Even Caesar's fortune at one time was, but a grand presentiment.  We
know what a masquerade all development is, and what effective shapes
may be disguised in helpless embryos.--In fact, the world is full of
hopeful analogies and handsome dubious eggs called possibilities.  Will
saw clearly enough the pitiable instances of long incubation producing
no chick, and but for gratitude would have laughed at Casaubon, whose
plodding application, rows of note-books, and small taper of learned
theory exploring the tossed ruins of the world, seemed to enforce a
moral entirely encouraging to Will's generous reliance on the
intentions of the universe with regard to himself.  He held that
reliance to be a mark of genius; and certainly it is no mark to the
contrary; genius consisting neither in self-conceit nor in humility,
but in a power to make or do, not anything in general, but something in
particular.  Let him start for the Continent, then, without our
pronouncing on his future.  Among all forms of mistake, prophecy is the
most gratuitous.

But at present this caution against a too hasty judgment interests me
more in relation to Mr. Casaubon than to his young cousin.  If to
Dorothea Mr. Casaubon had been the mere occasion which had set alight
the fine inflammable material of her youthful illusions, does it follow
that he was fairly represented in the minds of those less impassioned
personages who have hitherto delivered their judgments concerning him?
I protest against any absolute conclusion, any prejudice derived from
Mrs. Cadwallader's contempt for a neighboring clergyman's alleged
greatness of soul, or Sir James Chettam's poor opinion of his rival's
legs,--from Mr. Brooke's failure to elicit a companion's ideas, or from
Celia's criticism of a middle-aged scholar's personal appearance.  I am
not sure that the greatest man of his age, if ever that solitary
superlative existed, could escape these unfavorable reflections of
himself in various small mirrors; and even Milton, looking for his
portrait in a spoon, must submit to have the facial angle of a bumpkin.
Moreover, if Mr. Casaubon, speaking for himself, has rather a chilling
rhetoric, it is not therefore certain that there is no good work or
fine feeling in him.  Did not an immortal physicist and interpreter of
hieroglyphs write detestable verses?  Has the theory of the solar
system been advanced by graceful manners and conversational tact?
Suppose we turn from outside estimates of a man, to wonder, with keener
interest, what is the report of his own consciousness about his doings
or capacity: with what hindrances he is carrying on his daily labors;
what fading of hopes, or what deeper fixity of self-delusion the years
are marking off within him; and with what spirit he wrestles against
universal pressure, which will one day be too heavy for him, and bring
his heart to its final pause.  Doubtless his lot is important in his
own eyes; and the chief reason that we think he asks too large a place
in our consideration must be our want of room for him, since we refer
him to the Divine regard with perfect confidence; nay, it is even held
sublime for our neighbor to expect the utmost there, however little he
may have got from us.  Mr. Casaubon, too, was the centre of his own
world; if he was liable to think that others were providentially made
for him, and especially to consider them in the light of their fitness
for the author of a "Key to all Mythologies," this trait is not quite
alien to us, and, like the other mendicant hopes of mortals, claims
some of our pity.

Certainly this affair of his marriage with Miss Brooke touched him more
nearly than it did any one of the persons who have hitherto shown their
disapproval of it, and in the present stage of things I feel more
tenderly towards his experience of success than towards the
disappointment of the amiable Sir James.  For in truth, as the day
fixed for his marriage came nearer, Mr. Casaubon did not find his
spirits rising; nor did the contemplation of that matrimonial garden
scene, where, as all experience showed, the path was to be bordered
with flowers, prove persistently more enchanting to him than the
accustomed vaults where he walked taper in hand.  He did not confess to
himself, still less could he have breathed to another, his surprise
that though he had won a lovely and noble-hearted girl he had not won
delight,--which he had also regarded as an object to be found by
search.  It is true that he knew all the classical passages implying
the contrary; but knowing classical passages, we find, is a mode of
motion, which explains why they leave so little extra force for their
personal application.

Poor Mr. Casaubon had imagined that his long studious bachelorhood had
stored up for him a compound interest of enjoyment, and that large
drafts on his affections would not fail to be honored; for we all of
us, grave or light, get our thoughts entangled in metaphors, and act
fatally on the strength of them.  And now he was in danger of being
saddened by the very conviction that his circumstances were unusually
happy: there was nothing external by which he could account for a
certain blankness of sensibility which came over him just when his
expectant gladness should have been most lively, just when he exchanged
the accustomed dulness of his Lowick library for his visits to the
Grange.  Here was a weary experience in which he was as utterly
condemned to loneliness as in the despair which sometimes threatened
him while toiling in the morass of authorship without seeming nearer to
the goal.  And his was that worst loneliness which would shrink from
sympathy.  He could not but wish that Dorothea should think him not
less happy than the world would expect her successful suitor to be; and
in relation to his authorship he leaned on her young trust and
veneration, he liked to draw forth her fresh interest in listening, as
a means of encouragement to himself: in talking to her he presented all
his performance and intention with the reflected confidence of the
pedagogue, and rid himself for the time of that chilling ideal audience
which crowded his laborious uncreative hours with the vaporous pressure
of Tartarean shades.

For to Dorothea, after that toy-box history of the world adapted to
young ladies which had made the chief part of her education, Mr.
Casaubon's talk about his great book was full of new vistas; and this
sense of revelation, this surprise of a nearer introduction to Stoics
and Alexandrians, as people who had ideas not totally unlike her own,
kept in abeyance for the time her usual eagerness for a binding theory
which could bring her own life and doctrine into strict connection with
that amazing past, and give the remotest sources of knowledge some
bearing on her actions.  That more complete teaching would come--Mr.
Casaubon would tell her all that: she was looking forward to higher
initiation in ideas, as she was looking forward to marriage, and
blending her dim conceptions of both.  It would be a great mistake to
suppose that Dorothea would have cared about any share in Mr.
Casaubon's learning as mere accomplishment; for though opinion in the
neighborhood of Freshitt and Tipton had pronounced her clever, that
epithet would not have described her to circles in whose more precise
vocabulary cleverness implies mere aptitude for knowing and doing,
apart from character.  All her eagerness for acquirement lay within
that full current of sympathetic motive in which her ideas and impulses
were habitually swept along.  She did not want to deck herself with
knowledge--to wear it loose from the nerves and blood that fed her
action; and if she had written a book she must have done it as Saint
Theresa did, under the command of an authority that constrained her
conscience.  But something she yearned for by which her life might be
filled with action at once rational and ardent; and since the time was
gone by for guiding visions and spiritual directors, since prayer
heightened yearning but not instruction, what lamp was there but
knowledge?  Surely learned men kept the only oil; and who more learned
than Mr. Casaubon?

Thus in these brief weeks Dorothea's joyous grateful expectation was
unbroken, and however her lover might occasionally be conscious of
flatness, he could never refer it to any slackening of her affectionate
interest.

The season was mild enough to encourage the project of extending the
wedding journey as far as Rome, and Mr. Casaubon was anxious for this
because he wished to inspect some manuscripts in the Vatican.

"I still regret that your sister is not to accompany us," he said one
morning, some time after it had been ascertained that Celia objected to
go, and that Dorothea did not wish for her companionship.  "You will
have many lonely hours, Dorothea, for I shall be constrained to make
the utmost use of my time during our stay in Rome, and I should feel
more at liberty if you had a companion."

The words "I should feel more at liberty" grated on Dorothea.  For the
first time in speaking to Mr. Casaubon she colored from annoyance.

"You must have misunderstood me very much," she said, "if you think I
should not enter into the value of your time--if you think that I
should not willingly give up whatever interfered with your using it to
the best purpose."

"That is very amiable in you, my dear Dorothea," said Mr. Casaubon, not
in the least noticing that she was hurt; "but if you had a lady as your
companion, I could put you both under the care of a cicerone, and we
could thus achieve two purposes in the same space of time."

"I beg you will not refer to this again," said Dorothea, rather
haughtily.  But immediately she feared that she was wrong, and turning
towards him she laid her hand on his, adding in a different tone, "Pray
do not be anxious about me.  I shall have so much to think of when I am
alone.  And Tantripp will be a sufficient companion, just to take care
of me.  I could not bear to have Celia: she would be miserable."

It was time to dress.  There was to be a dinner-party that day, the
last of the parties which were held at the Grange as proper
preliminaries to the wedding, and Dorothea was glad of a reason for
moving away at once on the sound of the bell, as if she needed more
than her usual amount of preparation.  She was ashamed of being
irritated from some cause she could not define even to herself; for
though she had no intention to be untruthful, her reply had not touched
the real hurt within her.  Mr. Casaubon's words had been quite
reasonable, yet they had brought a vague instantaneous sense of
aloofness on his part.

"Surely I am in a strangely selfish weak state of mind," she said to
herself.  "How can I have a husband who is so much above me without
knowing that he needs me less than I need him?"

Having convinced herself that Mr. Casaubon was altogether right, she
recovered her equanimity, and was an agreeable image of serene dignity
when she came into the drawing-room in her silver-gray dress--the
simple lines of her dark-brown hair parted over her brow and coiled
massively behind, in keeping with the entire absence from her manner
and expression of all search after mere effect.  Sometimes when
Dorothea was in company, there seemed to be as complete an air of
repose about her as if she had been a picture of Santa Barbara looking
out from her tower into the clear air; but these intervals of quietude
made the energy of her speech and emotion the more remarked when some
outward appeal had touched her.

She was naturally the subject of many observations this evening, for
the dinner-party was large and rather more miscellaneous as to the male
portion than any which had been held at the Grange since Mr. Brooke's
nieces had resided with him, so that the talking was done in duos and
trios more or less inharmonious.  There was the newly elected mayor of
Middlemarch, who happened to be a manufacturer; the philanthropic
banker his brother-in-law, who predominated so much in the town that
some called him a Methodist, others a hypocrite, according to the
resources of their vocabulary; and there were various professional men.
In fact, Mrs. Cadwallader said that Brooke was beginning to treat the
Middlemarchers, and that she preferred the farmers at the tithe-dinner,
who drank her health unpretentiously, and were not ashamed of their
grandfathers' furniture.  For in that part of the country, before
reform had done its notable part in developing the political
consciousness, there was a clearer distinction of ranks and a dimmer
distinction of parties; so that Mr. Brooke's miscellaneous invitations
seemed to belong to that general laxity which came from his inordinate
travel and habit of taking too much in the form of ideas.

Already, as Miss Brooke passed out of the dining-room, opportunity was
found for some interjectional "asides."

"A fine woman, Miss Brooke! an uncommonly fine woman, by God!" said Mr.
Standish, the old lawyer, who had been so long concerned with the
landed gentry that he had become landed himself, and used that oath in
a deep-mouthed manner as a sort of armorial bearings, stamping the
speech of a man who held a good position.

Mr. Bulstrode, the banker, seemed to be addressed, but that gentleman
disliked coarseness and profanity, and merely bowed.  The remark was
taken up by Mr. Chichely, a middle-aged bachelor and coursing
celebrity, who had a complexion something like an Easter egg, a few
hairs carefully arranged, and a carriage implying the consciousness of
a distinguished appearance.

"Yes, but not my style of woman: I like a woman who lays herself out a
little more to please us.  There should be a little filigree about a
woman--something of the coquette.  A man likes a sort of challenge.
The more of a dead set she makes at you the better."

"There's some truth in that," said Mr. Standish, disposed to be genial.
"And, by God, it's usually the way with them.  I suppose it answers
some wise ends: Providence made them so, eh, Bulstrode?"

"I should be disposed to refer coquetry to another source," said Mr.
Bulstrode.  "I should rather refer it to the devil."

"Ay, to be sure, there should be a little devil in a woman," said Mr.
Chichely, whose study of the fair sex seemed to have been detrimental
to his theology.  "And I like them blond, with a certain gait, and a
swan neck.  Between ourselves, the mayor's daughter is more to my taste
than Miss Brooke or Miss Celia either.  If I were a marrying man I
should choose Miss Vincy before either of them."

"Well, make up, make up," said Mr. Standish, jocosely; "you see the
middle-aged fellows early the day."

Mr. Chichely shook his head with much meaning: he was not going to
incur the certainty of being accepted by the woman he would choose.

The Miss Vincy who had the honor of being Mr. Chichely's ideal was of
course not present; for Mr. Brooke, always objecting to go too far,
would not have chosen that his nieces should meet the daughter of a
Middlemarch manufacturer, unless it were on a public occasion.  The
feminine part of the company included none whom Lady Chettam or Mrs.
Cadwallader could object to; for Mrs. Renfrew, the colonel's widow, was
not only unexceptionable in point of breeding, but also interesting on
the ground of her complaint, which puzzled the doctors, and seemed
clearly a case wherein the fulness of professional knowledge might need
the supplement of quackery.  Lady Chettam, who attributed her own
remarkable health to home-made bitters united with constant medical
attendance, entered with much exercise of the imagination into Mrs.
Renfrew's account of symptoms, and into the amazing futility in her
case of all strengthening medicines.

"Where can all the strength of those medicines go, my dear?" said the
mild but stately dowager, turning to Mrs. Cadwallader reflectively,
when Mrs. Renfrew's attention was called away.

"It strengthens the disease," said the Rector's wife, much too
well-born not to be an amateur in medicine.  "Everything depends on the
constitution: some people make fat, some blood, and some bile--that's
my view of the matter; and whatever they take is a sort of grist to the
mill."

"Then she ought to take medicines that would reduce--reduce the
disease, you know, if you are right, my dear.  And I think what you say
is reasonable."

"Certainly it is reasonable.  You have two sorts of potatoes, fed on
the same soil.  One of them grows more and more watery--"

"Ah! like this poor Mrs. Renfrew--that is what I think.  Dropsy!  There
is no swelling yet--it is inward.  I should say she ought to take
drying medicines, shouldn't you?--or a dry hot-air bath.  Many things
might be tried, of a drying nature."

"Let her try a certain person's pamphlets," said Mrs. Cadwallader in an
undertone, seeing the gentlemen enter.  "He does not want drying."

"Who, my dear?" said Lady Chettam, a charming woman, not so quick as to
nullify the pleasure of explanation.

"The bridegroom--Casaubon. He has certainly been drying up faster since
the engagement: the flame of passion, I suppose."

"I should think he is far from having a good constitution," said Lady
Chettam, with a still deeper undertone.  "And then his studies--so very
dry, as you say."

"Really, by the side of Sir James, he looks like a death's head skinned
over for the occasion.  Mark my words: in a year from this time that
girl will hate him.  She looks up to him as an oracle now, and
by-and-by she will be at the other extreme.  All flightiness!"

"How very shocking!  I fear she is headstrong.  But tell me--you know
all about him--is there anything very bad?  What is the truth?"

"The truth? he is as bad as the wrong physic--nasty to take, and sure
to disagree."

"There could not be anything worse than that," said Lady Chettam, with
so vivid a conception of the physic that she seemed to have learned
something exact about Mr. Casaubon's disadvantages.  "However, James
will hear nothing against Miss Brooke.  He says she is the mirror of
women still."

"That is a generous make-believe of his.  Depend upon it, he likes
little Celia better, and she appreciates him.  I hope you like my
little Celia?"

"Certainly; she is fonder of geraniums, and seems more docile, though
not so fine a figure.  But we were talking of physic.  Tell me about
this new young surgeon, Mr. Lydgate.  I am told he is wonderfully
clever: he certainly looks it--a fine brow indeed."

"He is a gentleman.  I heard him talking to Humphrey.  He talks well."

"Yes. Mr. Brooke says he is one of the Lydgates of Northumberland,
really well connected.  One does not expect it in a practitioner of
that kind.  For my own part, I like a medical man more on a footing
with the servants; they are often all the cleverer.  I assure you I
found poor Hicks's judgment unfailing; I never knew him wrong.  He was
coarse and butcher-like, but he knew my constitution.  It was a loss to
me his going off so suddenly.  Dear me, what a very animated
conversation Miss Brooke seems to be having with this Mr. Lydgate!"

"She is talking cottages and hospitals with him," said Mrs.
Cadwallader, whose ears and power of interpretation were quick.  "I
believe he is a sort of philanthropist, so Brooke is sure to take him
up."

"James," said Lady Chettam when her son came near, "bring Mr. Lydgate
and introduce him to me.  I want to test him."

The affable dowager declared herself delighted with this opportunity of
making Mr. Lydgate's acquaintance, having heard of his success in
treating fever on a new plan.

Mr. Lydgate had the medical accomplishment of looking perfectly grave
whatever nonsense was talked to him, and his dark steady eyes gave him
impressiveness as a listener.  He was as little as possible like the
lamented Hicks, especially in a certain careless refinement about his
toilet and utterance.  Yet Lady Chettam gathered much confidence in
him.  He confirmed her view of her own constitution as being peculiar,
by admitting that all constitutions might be called peculiar, and he
did not deny that hers might be more peculiar than others.  He did not
approve of a too lowering system, including reckless cupping, nor, on
the other hand, of incessant port wine and bark.  He said "I think so"
with an air of so much deference accompanying the insight of agreement,
that she formed the most cordial opinion of his talents.

"I am quite pleased with your protege," she said to Mr. Brooke before
going away.

"My protege?--dear me!--who is that?" said Mr. Brooke.

"This young Lydgate, the new doctor. He seems to me to understand his
profession admirably."

"Oh, Lydgate! he is not my protege, you know; only I knew an uncle of
his who sent me a letter about him.  However, I think he is likely to
be first-rate--has studied in Paris, knew Broussais; has ideas, you
know--wants to raise the profession."

"Lydgate has lots of ideas, quite new, about ventilation and diet, that
sort of thing," resumed Mr. Brooke, after he had handed out Lady
Chettam, and had returned to be civil to a group of Middlemarchers.

"Hang it, do you think that is quite sound?--upsetting The old
treatment, which has made Englishmen what they are?" said Mr. Standish.

"Medical knowledge is at a low ebb among us," said Mr. Bulstrode, who
spoke in a subdued tone, and had rather a sickly air.  "I, for my part,
hail the advent of Mr. Lydgate.  I hope to find good reason for
confiding the new hospital to his management."

"That is all very fine," replied Mr. Standish, who was not fond of Mr.
Bulstrode; "if you like him to try experiments on your hospital
patients, and kill a few people for charity I have no objection.  But I
am not going to hand money out of my purse to have experiments tried on
me.  I like treatment that has been tested a little."

"Well, you know, Standish, every dose you take is an experiment-an
experiment, you know," said Mr. Brooke, nodding towards the lawyer.

"Oh, if you talk in that sense!" said Mr. Standish, with as much
disgust at such non-legal quibbling as a man can well betray towards a
valuable client.

"I should be glad of any treatment that would cure me without reducing
me to a skeleton, like poor Grainger," said Mr. Vincy, the mayor, a
florid man, who would have served for a study of flesh in striking
contrast with the Franciscan tints of Mr. Bulstrode.  "It's an
uncommonly dangerous thing to be left without any padding against the
shafts of disease, as somebody said,--and I think it a very good
expression myself."

Mr. Lydgate, of course, was out of hearing.  He had quitted the party
early, and would have thought it altogether tedious but for the novelty
of certain introductions, especially the introduction to Miss Brooke,
whose youthful bloom, with her approaching marriage to that faded
scholar, and her interest in matters socially useful, gave her the
piquancy of an unusual combination.

"She is a good creature--that fine girl--but a little too earnest," he
thought.  "It is troublesome to talk to such women.  They are always
wanting reasons, yet they are too ignorant to understand the merits of
any question, and usually fall back on their moral sense to settle
things after their own taste."

Evidently Miss Brooke was not Mr. Lydgate's style of woman any more
than Mr. Chichely's. Considered, indeed, in relation to the latter,
whose mind was matured, she was altogether a mistake, and calculated to
shock his trust in final causes, including the adaptation of fine young
women to purplefaced bachelors.  But Lydgate was less ripe, and might
possibly have experience before him which would modify his opinion as
to the most excellent things in woman.

Miss Brooke, however, was not again seen by either of these gentlemen
under her maiden name.  Not long after that dinner-party she had become
Mrs. Casaubon, and was on her way to Rome.



CHAPTER XI.

    "But deeds and language such as men do use,
     And persons such as comedy would choose,
     When she would show an image of the times,
     And sport with human follies, not with crimes."
                                       --BEN JONSON.


Lydgate, in fact, was already conscious of being fascinated by a woman
strikingly different from Miss Brooke: he did not in the least suppose
that he had lost his balance and fallen in love, but he had said of
that particular woman, "She is grace itself; she is perfectly lovely
and accomplished.  That is what a woman ought to be: she ought to
produce the effect of exquisite music." Plain women he regarded as he
did the other severe facts of life, to be faced with philosophy and
investigated by science.  But Rosamond Vincy seemed to have the true
melodic charm; and when a man has seen the woman whom he would have
chosen if he had intended to marry speedily, his remaining a bachelor
will usually depend on her resolution rather than on his.  Lydgate
believed that he should not marry for several years: not marry until he
had trodden out a good clear path for himself away from the broad road
which was quite ready made.  He had seen Miss Vincy above his horizon
almost as long as it had taken Mr. Casaubon to become engaged and
married: but this learned gentleman was possessed of a fortune; he had
assembled his voluminous notes, and had made that sort of reputation
which precedes performance,--often the larger part of a man's fame.  He
took a wife, as we have seen, to adorn the remaining quadrant of his
course, and be a little moon that would cause hardly a calculable
perturbation.  But Lydgate was young, poor, ambitious.  He had his
half-century before him instead of behind him, and he had come to
Middlemarch bent on doing many things that were not directly fitted to
make his fortune or even secure him a good income.  To a man under such
circumstances, taking a wife is something more than a question of
adornment, however highly he may rate this; and Lydgate was disposed to
give it the first place among wifely functions.  To his taste, guided
by a single conversation, here was the point on which Miss Brooke would
be found wanting, notwithstanding her undeniable beauty.  She did not
look at things from the proper feminine angle.  The society of such
women was about as relaxing as going from your work to teach the second
form, instead of reclining in a paradise with sweet laughs for
bird-notes, and blue eyes for a heaven.

Certainly nothing at present could seem much less important to Lydgate
than the turn of Miss Brooke's mind, or to Miss Brooke than the
qualities of the woman who had attracted this young surgeon.  But any
one watching keenly the stealthy convergence of human lots, sees a slow
preparation of effects from one life on another, which tells like a
calculated irony on the indifference or the frozen stare with which we
look at our unintroduced neighbor.  Destiny stands by sarcastic with
our dramatis personae folded in her hand.

Old provincial society had its share of this subtle movement: had not
only its striking downfalls, its brilliant young professional dandies
who ended by living up an entry with a drab and six children for their
establishment, but also those less marked vicissitudes which are
constantly shifting the boundaries of social intercourse, and begetting
new consciousness of interdependence.  Some slipped a little downward,
some got higher footing: people denied aspirates, gained wealth, and
fastidious gentlemen stood for boroughs; some were caught in political
currents, some in ecclesiastical, and perhaps found themselves
surprisingly grouped in consequence; while a few personages or families
that stood with rocky firmness amid all this fluctuation, were slowly
presenting new aspects in spite of solidity, and altering with the
double change of self and beholder.  Municipal town and rural parish
gradually made fresh threads of connection--gradually, as the old
stocking gave way to the savings-bank, and the worship of the solar
guinea became extinct; while squires and baronets, and even lords who
had once lived blamelessly afar from the civic mind, gathered the
faultiness of closer acquaintanceship.  Settlers, too, came from
distant counties, some with an alarming novelty of skill, others with
an offensive advantage in cunning.  In fact, much the same sort of
movement and mixture went on in old England as we find in older
Herodotus, who also, in telling what had been, thought it well to take
a woman's lot for his starting-point; though Io, as a maiden apparently
beguiled by attractive merchandise, was the reverse of Miss Brooke, and
in this respect perhaps bore more resemblance to Rosamond Vincy, who
had excellent taste in costume, with that nymph-like figure and pure
blindness which give the largest range to choice in the flow and color
of drapery.  But these things made only part of her charm.  She was
admitted to be the flower of Mrs. Lemon's school, the chief school in
the county, where the teaching included all that was demanded in the
accomplished female--even to extras, such as the getting in and out of
a carriage.  Mrs. Lemon herself had always held up Miss Vincy as an
example: no pupil, she said, exceeded that young lady for mental
acquisition and propriety of speech, while her musical execution was
quite exceptional.  We cannot help the way in which people speak of us,
and probably if Mrs. Lemon had undertaken to describe Juliet or Imogen,
these heroines would not have seemed poetical.  The first vision of
Rosamond would have been enough with most judges to dispel any
prejudice excited by Mrs. Lemon's praise.

Lydgate could not be long in Middlemarch without having that agreeable
vision, or even without making the acquaintance of the Vincy family;
for though Mr. Peacock, whose practice he had paid something to enter
on, had not been their doctor (Mrs. Vincy not liking the lowering
system adopted by him), he had many patients among their connections
and acquaintances.  For who of any consequence in Middlemarch was not
connected or at least acquainted with the Vincys?  They were old
manufacturers, and had kept a good house for three generations, in
which there had naturally been much intermarrying with neighbors more
or less decidedly genteel.  Mr. Vincy's sister had made a wealthy match
in accepting Mr. Bulstrode, who, however, as a man not born in the
town, and altogether of dimly known origin, was considered to have done
well in uniting himself with a real Middlemarch family; on the other
hand, Mr. Vincy had descended a little, having taken an innkeeper's
daughter.  But on this side too there was a cheering sense of money;
for Mrs. Vincy's sister had been second wife to rich old Mr.
Featherstone, and had died childless years ago, so that her nephews and
nieces might be supposed to touch the affections of the widower.  And
it happened that Mr. Bulstrode and Mr. Featherstone, two of Peacock's
most important patients, had, from different causes, given an
especially good reception to his successor, who had raised some
partisanship as well as discussion.  Mr. Wrench, medical attendant to
the Vincy family, very early had grounds for thinking lightly of
Lydgate's professional discretion, and there was no report about him
which was not retailed at the Vincys', where visitors were frequent.
Mr. Vincy was more inclined to general good-fellowship than to taking
sides, but there was no need for him to be hasty in making any new man
acquaintance.  Rosamond silently wished that her father would invite
Mr. Lydgate.  She was tired of the faces and figures she had always
been used to--the various irregular profiles and gaits and turns of
phrase distinguishing those Middlemarch young men whom she had known as
boys.  She had been at school with girls of higher position, whose
brothers, she felt sure, it would have been possible for her to be more
interested in, than in these inevitable Middlemarch companions.  But
she would not have chosen to mention her wish to her father; and he,
for his part, was in no hurry on the subject.  An alderman about to be
mayor must by-and-by enlarge his dinner-parties, but at present there
were plenty of guests at his well-spread table.

That table often remained covered with the relics of the family
breakfast long after Mr. Vincy had gone with his second son to the
warehouse, and when Miss Morgan was already far on in morning lessons
with the younger girls in the schoolroom.  It awaited the family
laggard, who found any sort of inconvenience (to others) less
disagreeable than getting up when he was called.  This was the case one
morning of the October in which we have lately seen Mr. Casaubon
visiting the Grange; and though the room was a little overheated with
the fire, which had sent the spaniel panting to a remote corner,
Rosamond, for some reason, continued to sit at her embroidery longer
than usual, now and then giving herself a little shake, and laying her
work on her knee to contemplate it with an air of hesitating weariness.
Her mamma, who had returned from an excursion to the kitchen, sat on
the other side of the small work-table with an air of more entire
placidity, until, the clock again giving notice that it was going to
strike, she looked up from the lace-mending which was occupying her
plump fingers and rang the bell.

"Knock at Mr. Fred's door again, Pritchard, and tell him it has struck
half-past ten."

This was said without any change in the radiant good-humor of Mrs.
Vincy's face, in which forty-five years had delved neither angles nor
parallels; and pushing back her pink capstrings, she let her work rest
on her lap, while she looked admiringly at her daughter.

"Mamma," said Rosamond, "when Fred comes down I wish you would not let
him have red herrings.  I cannot bear the smell of them all over the
house at this hour of the morning."

"Oh, my dear, you are so hard on your brothers!  It is the only fault I
have to find with you.  You are the sweetest temper in the world, but
you are so tetchy with your brothers."

"Not tetchy, mamma: you never hear me speak in an unladylike way."

"Well, but you want to deny them things."

"Brothers are so unpleasant."

"Oh, my dear, you must allow for young men.  Be thankful if they have
good hearts.  A woman must learn to put up with little things.  You
will be married some day."

"Not to any one who is like Fred."

"Don't decry your own brother, my dear.  Few young men have less
against them, although he couldn't take his degree--I'm sure I can't
understand why, for he seems to me most clever.  And you know yourself
he was thought equal to the best society at college.  So particular as
you are, my dear, I wonder you are not glad to have such a gentlemanly
young man for a brother.  You are always finding fault with Bob because
he is not Fred."

"Oh no, mamma, only because he is Bob."

"Well, my dear, you will not find any Middlemarch young man who has not
something against him."

"But"--here Rosamond's face broke into a smile which suddenly revealed
two dimples.  She herself thought unfavorably of these dimples and
smiled little in general society.  "But I shall not marry any
Middlemarch young man."

"So it seems, my love, for you have as good as refused the pick of
them; and if there's better to be had, I'm sure there's no girl better
deserves it."

"Excuse me, mamma--I wish you would not say, 'the pick of them.'"

"Why, what else are they?"

"I mean, mamma, it is rather a vulgar expression."

"Very likely, my dear; I never was a good speaker.  What should I say?"

"The best of them."

"Why, that seems just as plain and common.  If I had had time to think,
I should have said, 'the most superior young men.' But with your
education you must know."

"What must Rosy know, mother?" said Mr. Fred, who had slid in
unobserved through the half-open door while the ladies were bending
over their work, and now going up to the fire stood with his back
towards it, warming the soles of his slippers.

"Whether it's right to say 'superior young men,'" said Mrs. Vincy,
ringing the bell.

"Oh, there are so many superior teas and sugars now.  Superior is
getting to be shopkeepers' slang."

"Are you beginning to dislike slang, then?" said Rosamond, with mild
gravity.

"Only the wrong sort.  All choice of words is slang.  It marks a class."

"There is correct English: that is not slang."

"I beg your pardon: correct English is the slang of prigs who write
history and essays.  And the strongest slang of all is the slang of
poets."

"You will say anything, Fred, to gain your point."

"Well, tell me whether it is slang or poetry to call an ox a
leg-plaiter."

"Of course you can call it poetry if you like."

"Aha, Miss Rosy, you don't know Homer from slang.  I shall invent a new
game; I shall write bits of slang and poetry on slips, and give them to
you to separate."

"Dear me, how amusing it is to hear young people talk!" said Mrs.
Vincy, with cheerful admiration.

"Have you got nothing else for my breakfast, Pritchard?" said Fred, to
the servant who brought in coffee and buttered toast; while he walked
round the table surveying the ham, potted beef, and other cold
remnants, with an air of silent rejection, and polite forbearance from
signs of disgust.

"Should you like eggs, sir?"

"Eggs, no!  Bring me a grilled bone."

"Really, Fred," said Rosamond, when the servant had left the room, "if
you must have hot things for breakfast, I wish you would come down
earlier.  You can get up at six o'clock to go out hunting; I cannot
understand why you find it so difficult to get up on other mornings."

"That is your want of understanding, Rosy.  I can get up to go hunting
because I like it."

"What would you think of me if I came down two hours after every one
else and ordered grilled bone?"

"I should think you were an uncommonly fast young lady," said Fred,
eating his toast with the utmost composure.

"I cannot see why brothers are to make themselves disagreeable, any
more than sisters."

"I don't make myself disagreeable; it is you who find me so.
Disagreeable is a word that describes your feelings and not my actions."

"I think it describes the smell of grilled bone."

"Not at all.  It describes a sensation in your little nose associated
with certain finicking notions which are the classics of Mrs. Lemon's
school.  Look at my mother; you don't see her objecting to everything
except what she does herself.  She is my notion of a pleasant woman."

"Bless you both, my dears, and don't quarrel," said Mrs. Vincy, with
motherly cordiality.  "Come, Fred, tell us all about the new doctor.
How is your uncle pleased with him?"

"Pretty well, I think.  He asks Lydgate all sorts of questions and then
screws up his face while he hears the answers, as if they were pinching
his toes.  That's his way.  Ah, here comes my grilled bone."

"But how came you to stay out so late, my dear?  You only said you were
going to your uncle's."

"Oh, I dined at Plymdale's. We had whist.  Lydgate was there too."

"And what do you think of him?  He is very gentlemanly, I suppose.
They say he is of excellent family--his relations quite county people."

"Yes," said Fred.  "There was a Lydgate at John's who spent no end of
money.  I find this man is a second cousin of his.  But rich men may
have very poor devils for second cousins."

"It always makes a difference, though, to be of good family," said
Rosamond, with a tone of decision which showed that she had thought on
this subject.  Rosamond felt that she might have been happier if she
had not been the daughter of a Middlemarch manufacturer.  She disliked
anything which reminded her that her mother's father had been an
innkeeper.  Certainly any one remembering the fact might think that
Mrs. Vincy had the air of a very handsome good-humored landlady,
accustomed to the most capricious orders of gentlemen.

"I thought it was odd his name was Tertius," said the bright-faced
matron, "but of course it's a name in the family.  But now, tell us
exactly what sort of man he is."

"Oh, tallish, dark, clever--talks well--rather a prig, I think."

"I never can make out what you mean by a prig," said Rosamond.

"A fellow who wants to show that he has opinions."

"Why, my dear, doctors must have opinions," said Mrs. Vincy.  "What are
they there for else?"

"Yes, mother, the opinions they are paid for.  But a prig is a fellow
who is always making you a present of his opinions."

"I suppose Mary Garth admires Mr. Lydgate," said Rosamond, not without
a touch of innuendo.

"Really, I can't say." said Fred, rather glumly, as he left the table,
and taking up a novel which he had brought down with him, threw himself
into an arm-chair. "If you are jealous of her, go oftener to Stone
Court yourself and eclipse her."

"I wish you would not be so vulgar, Fred.  If you have finished, pray
ring the bell."

"It is true, though--what your brother says, Rosamond," Mrs. Vincy
began, when the servant had cleared the table.  "It is a thousand
pities you haven't patience to go and see your uncle more, so proud of
you as he is, and wanted you to live with him.  There's no knowing what
he might have done for you as well as for Fred.  God knows, I'm fond of
having you at home with me, but I can part with my children for their
good.  And now it stands to reason that your uncle Featherstone will do
something for Mary Garth."

"Mary Garth can bear being at Stone Court, because she likes that
better than being a governess," said Rosamond, folding up her work.  "I
would rather not have anything left to me if I must earn it by enduring
much of my uncle's cough and his ugly relations."

"He can't be long for this world, my dear; I wouldn't hasten his end,
but what with asthma and that inward complaint, let us hope there is
something better for him in another.  And I have no ill-will toward's
Mary Garth, but there's justice to be thought of.  And Mr.
Featherstone's first wife brought him no money, as my sister did.  Her
nieces and nephews can't have so much claim as my sister's.  And I must
say I think Mary Garth a dreadful plain girl--more fit for a governess."

"Every one would not agree with you there, mother," said Fred, who
seemed to be able to read and listen too.

"Well, my dear," said Mrs. Vincy, wheeling skilfully, "if she _had_
some fortune left her,--a man marries his wife's relations, and the
Garths are so poor, and live in such a small way.  But I shall leave
you to your studies, my dear; for I must go and do some shopping."

"Fred's studies are not very deep," said Rosamond, rising with her
mamma, "he is only reading a novel."

"Well, well, by-and-by he'll go to his Latin and things," said Mrs.
Vincy, soothingly, stroking her son's head.  "There's a fire in the
smoking-room on purpose.  It's your father's wish, you know--Fred, my
dear--and I always tell him you will be good, and go to college again
to take your degree."

Fred drew his mother's hand down to his lips, but said nothing.

"I suppose you are not going out riding to-day?" said Rosamond,
lingering a little after her mamma was gone.

"No; why?"

"Papa says I may have the chestnut to ride now."

"You can go with me to-morrow, if you like.  Only I am going to Stone
Court, remember."

"I want to ride so much, it is indifferent to me where we go." Rosamond
really wished to go to Stone Court, of all other places.

"Oh, I say, Rosy," said Fred, as she was passing out of the room, "if
you are going to the piano, let me come and play some airs with you."

"Pray do not ask me this morning."

"Why not this morning?"

"Really, Fred, I wish you would leave off playing the flute.  A man
looks very silly playing the flute.  And you play so out of tune."

"When next any one makes love to you, Miss Rosamond, I will tell him
how obliging you are."

"Why should you expect me to oblige you by hearing you play the flute,
any more than I should expect you to oblige me by not playing it?"

"And why should you expect me to take you out riding?"

This question led to an adjustment, for Rosamond had set her mind on
that particular ride.

So Fred was gratified with nearly an hour's practice of "Ar hyd y nos,"
"Ye banks and braes," and other favorite airs from his "Instructor on
the Flute;" a wheezy performance, into which he threw much ambition and
an irrepressible hopefulness.



CHAPTER XII.

    "He had more tow on his distaffe
     Than Gerveis knew."
                           --CHAUCER.


The ride to Stone Court, which Fred and Rosamond took the next morning,
lay through a pretty bit of midland landscape, almost all meadows and
pastures, with hedgerows still allowed to grow in bushy beauty and to
spread out coral fruit for the birds.  Little details gave each field a
particular physiognomy, dear to the eyes that have looked on them from
childhood: the pool in the corner where the grasses were dank and trees
leaned whisperingly; the great oak shadowing a bare place in
mid-pasture; the high bank where the ash-trees grew; the sudden slope
of the old marl-pit making a red background for the burdock; the
huddled roofs and ricks of the homestead without a traceable way of
approach; the gray gate and fences against the depths of the bordering
wood; and the stray hovel, its old, old thatch full of mossy hills and
valleys with wondrous modulations of light and shadow such as we travel
far to see in later life, and see larger, but not more beautiful.
These are the things that make the gamut of joy in landscape to
midland-bred souls--the things they toddled among, or perhaps learned
by heart standing between their father's knees while he drove leisurely.

But the road, even the byroad, was excellent; for Lowick, as we have
seen, was not a parish of muddy lanes and poor tenants; and it was into
Lowick parish that Fred and Rosamond entered after a couple of miles'
riding.  Another mile would bring them to Stone Court, and at the end
of the first half, the house was already visible, looking as if it had
been arrested in its growth toward a stone mansion by an unexpected
budding of farm-buildings on its left flank, which had hindered it from
becoming anything more than the substantial dwelling of a gentleman
farmer.  It was not the less agreeable an object in the distance for
the cluster of pinnacled corn-ricks which balanced the fine row of
walnuts on the right.

Presently it was possible to discern something that might be a gig on
the circular drive before the front door.

"Dear me," said Rosamond, "I hope none of my uncle's horrible relations
are there."

"They are, though.  That is Mrs. Waule's gig--the last yellow gig left,
I should think.  When I see Mrs. Waule in it, I understand how yellow
can have been worn for mourning.  That gig seems to me more funereal
than a hearse.  But then Mrs. Waule always has black crape on.  How
does she manage it, Rosy?  Her friends can't always be dying."

"I don't know at all.  And she is not in the least evangelical," said
Rosamond, reflectively, as if that religious point of view would have
fully accounted for perpetual crape.  "And, not poor," she added, after
a moment's pause.

"No, by George!  They are as rich as Jews, those Waules and
Featherstones; I mean, for people like them, who don't want to spend
anything.  And yet they hang about my uncle like vultures, and are
afraid of a farthing going away from their side of the family.  But I
believe he hates them all."

The Mrs. Waule who was so far from being admirable in the eyes of these
distant connections, had happened to say this very morning (not at all
with a defiant air, but in a low, muffled, neutral tone, as of a voice
heard through cotton wool) that she did not wish "to enjoy their good
opinion." She was seated, as she observed, on her own brother's hearth,
and had been Jane Featherstone five-and-twenty years before she had
been Jane Waule, which entitled her to speak when her own brother's
name had been made free with by those who had no right to it.

"What are you driving at there?" said Mr. Featherstone, holding his
stick between his knees and settling his wig, while he gave her a
momentary sharp glance, which seemed to react on him like a draught of
cold air and set him coughing.

Mrs. Waule had to defer her answer till he was quiet again, till Mary
Garth had supplied him with fresh syrup, and he had begun to rub the
gold knob of his stick, looking bitterly at the fire.  It was a bright
fire, but it made no difference to the chill-looking purplish tint of
Mrs. Waule's face, which was as neutral as her voice; having mere
chinks for eyes, and lips that hardly moved in speaking.

"The doctors can't master that cough, brother.  It's just like what I
have; for I'm your own sister, constitution and everything.  But, as I
was saying, it's a pity Mrs. Vincy's family can't be better conducted."

"Tchah! you said nothing o' the sort.  You said somebody had made free
with my name."

"And no more than can be proved, if what everybody says is true.  My
brother Solomon tells me it's the talk up and down in Middlemarch how
unsteady young Vincy is, and has been forever gambling at billiards
since home he came."

"Nonsense!  What's a game at billiards?  It's a good gentlemanly game;
and young Vincy is not a clodhopper.  If your son John took to
billiards, now, he'd make a fool of himself."

"Your nephew John never took to billiards or any other game, brother,
and is far from losing hundreds of pounds, which, if what everybody
says is true, must be found somewhere else than out of Mr. Vincy the
father's pocket.  For they say he's been losing money for years, though
nobody would think so, to see him go coursing and keeping open house as
they do.  And I've heard say Mr. Bulstrode condemns Mrs. Vincy beyond
anything for her flightiness, and spoiling her children so."

"What's Bulstrode to me?  I don't bank with him."

"Well, Mrs. Bulstrode is Mr. Vincy's own sister, and they do say that
Mr. Vincy mostly trades on the Bank money; and you may see yourself,
brother, when a woman past forty has pink strings always flying, and
that light way of laughing at everything, it's very unbecoming.  But
indulging your children is one thing, and finding money to pay their
debts is another.  And it's openly said that young Vincy has raised
money on his expectations.  I don't say what expectations.  Miss Garth
hears me, and is welcome to tell again.  I know young people hang
together."

"No, thank you, Mrs. Waule," said Mary Garth.  "I dislike hearing
scandal too much to wish to repeat it."

Mr. Featherstone rubbed the knob of his stick and made a brief
convulsive show of laughter, which had much the same genuineness as an
old whist-player's chuckle over a bad hand.  Still looking at the fire,
he said--

"And who pretends to say Fred Vincy hasn't got expectations?  Such a
fine, spirited fellow is like enough to have 'em."

There was a slight pause before Mrs. Waule replied, and when she did
so, her voice seemed to be slightly moistened with tears, though her
face was still dry.

"Whether or no, brother, it is naturally painful to me and my brother
Solomon to hear your name made free with, and your complaint being such
as may carry you off sudden, and people who are no more Featherstones
than the Merry-Andrew at the fair, openly reckoning on your property
coming to _them_.  And me your own sister, and Solomon your own
brother!  And if that's to be it, what has it pleased the Almighty to
make families for?" Here Mrs. Waule's tears fell, but with moderation.

"Come, out with it, Jane!" said Mr. Featherstone, looking at her.  "You
mean to say, Fred Vincy has been getting somebody to advance him money
on what he says he knows about my will, eh?"

"I never said so, brother" (Mrs. Waule's voice had again become dry and
unshaken). "It was told me by my brother Solomon last night when he
called coming from market to give me advice about the old wheat, me
being a widow, and my son John only three-and-twenty, though steady
beyond anything.  And he had it from most undeniable authority, and not
one, but many."

"Stuff and nonsense!  I don't believe a word of it.  It's all a got-up
story.  Go to the window, missy; I thought I heard a horse.  See if the
doctor's coming."

"Not got up by me, brother, nor yet by Solomon, who, whatever else he
may be--and I don't deny he has oddities--has made his will and parted
his property equal between such kin as he's friends with; though, for
my part, I think there are times when some should be considered more
than others.  But Solomon makes it no secret what he means to do."

"The more fool he!" said Mr. Featherstone, with some difficulty;
breaking into a severe fit of coughing that required Mary Garth to
stand near him, so that she did not find out whose horses they were
which presently paused stamping on the gravel before the door.

Before Mr. Featherstone's cough was quiet, Rosamond entered, bearing up
her riding-habit with much grace.  She bowed ceremoniously to Mrs.
Waule, who said stiffly, "How do you do, miss?" smiled and nodded
silently to Mary, and remained standing till the coughing should cease,
and allow her uncle to notice her.

"Heyday, miss!" he said at last, "you have a fine color.  Where's Fred?"

"Seeing about the horses.  He will be in presently."

"Sit down, sit down.  Mrs. Waule, you'd better go."

Even those neighbors who had called Peter Featherstone an old fox, had
never accused him of being insincerely polite, and his sister was quite
used to the peculiar absence of ceremony with which he marked his sense
of blood-relationship. Indeed, she herself was accustomed to think that
entire freedom from the necessity of behaving agreeably was included in
the Almighty's intentions about families.  She rose slowly without any
sign of resentment, and said in her usual muffled monotone, "Brother, I
hope the new doctor will be able to do something for you.  Solomon says
there's great talk of his cleverness.  I'm sure it's my wish you should
be spared.  And there's none more ready to nurse you than your own
sister and your own nieces, if you'd only say the word.  There's
Rebecca, and Joanna, and Elizabeth, you know."

"Ay, ay, I remember--you'll see I've remembered 'em all--all dark and
ugly.  They'd need have some money, eh?  There never was any beauty in
the women of our family; but the Featherstones have always had some
money, and the Waules too.  Waule had money too.  A warm man was Waule.
Ay, ay; money's a good egg; and if you 've got money to leave behind
you, lay it in a warm nest.  Good-by, Mrs. Waule." Here Mr.
Featherstone pulled at both sides of his wig as if he wanted to deafen
himself, and his sister went away ruminating on this oracular speech of
his.  Notwithstanding her jealousy of the Vincys and of Mary Garth,
there remained as the nethermost sediment in her mental shallows a
persuasion that her brother Peter Featherstone could never leave his
chief property away from his blood-relations:--else, why had the
Almighty carried off his two wives both childless, after he had gained
so much by manganese and things, turning up when nobody expected
it?--and why was there a Lowick parish church, and the Waules and
Powderells all sitting in the same pew for generations, and the
Featherstone pew next to them, if, the Sunday after her brother Peter's
death, everybody was to know that the property was gone out of the
family?  The human mind has at no period accepted a moral chaos; and so
preposterous a result was not strictly conceivable.  But we are
frightened at much that is not strictly conceivable.

When Fred came in the old man eyed him with a peculiar twinkle, which
the younger had often had reason to interpret as pride in the
satisfactory details of his appearance.

"You two misses go away," said Mr. Featherstone.  "I want to speak to
Fred."

"Come into my room, Rosamond, you will not mind the cold for a little
while," said Mary.  The two girls had not only known each other in
childhood, but had been at the same provincial school together (Mary as
an articled pupil), so that they had many memories in common, and liked
very well to talk in private.  Indeed, this tete-a-tete was one of
Rosamond's objects in coming to Stone Court.

Old Featherstone would not begin the dialogue till the door had been
closed.  He continued to look at Fred with the same twinkle and with
one of his habitual grimaces, alternately screwing and widening his
mouth; and when he spoke, it was in a low tone, which might be taken
for that of an informer ready to be bought off, rather than for the
tone of an offended senior.  He was not a man to feel any strong moral
indignation even on account of trespasses against himself.  It was
natural that others should want to get an advantage over him, but then,
he was a little too cunning for them.

"So, sir, you've been paying ten per cent for money which you've
promised to pay off by mortgaging my land when I'm dead and gone, eh?
You put my life at a twelvemonth, say.  But I can alter my will yet."

Fred blushed.  He had not borrowed money in that way, for excellent
reasons.  But he was conscious of having spoken with some confidence
(perhaps with more than he exactly remembered) about his prospect of
getting Featherstone's land as a future means of paying present debts.

"I don't know what you refer to, sir.  I have certainly never borrowed
any money on such an insecurity.  Please do explain."

"No, sir, it's you must explain.  I can alter my will yet, let me tell
you.  I'm of sound mind--can reckon compound interest in my head, and
remember every fool's name as well as I could twenty years ago.  What
the deuce?  I'm under eighty.  I say, you must contradict this story."

"I have contradicted it, sir," Fred answered, with a touch of
impatience, not remembering that his uncle did not verbally
discriminate contradicting from disproving, though no one was further
from confounding the two ideas than old Featherstone, who often
wondered that so many fools took his own assertions for proofs.  "But I
contradict it again.  The story is a silly lie."

"Nonsense! you must bring dockiments.  It comes from authority."

"Name the authority, and make him name the man of whom I borrowed the
money, and then I can disprove the story."

"It's pretty good authority, I think--a man who knows most of what goes
on in Middlemarch.  It's that fine, religious, charitable uncle o'
yours.  Come now!" Here Mr. Featherstone had his peculiar inward shake
which signified merriment.

"Mr. Bulstrode?"

"Who else, eh?"

"Then the story has grown into this lie out of some sermonizing words
he may have let fall about me.  Do they pretend that he named the man
who lent me the money?"

"If there is such a man, depend upon it Bulstrode knows him.  But,
supposing you only tried to get the money lent, and didn't get
it--Bulstrode 'ud know that too.  You bring me a writing from Bulstrode
to say he doesn't believe you've ever promised to pay your debts out o'
my land.  Come now!"

Mr. Featherstone's face required its whole scale of grimaces as a
muscular outlet to his silent triumph in the soundness of his faculties.

Fred felt himself to be in a disgusting dilemma.

"You must be joking, sir.  Mr. Bulstrode, like other men, believes
scores of things that are not true, and he has a prejudice against me.
I could easily get him to write that he knew no facts in proof of the
report you speak of, though it might lead to unpleasantness.  But I
could hardly ask him to write down what he believes or does not believe
about me." Fred paused an instant, and then added, in politic appeal to
his uncle's vanity, "That is hardly a thing for a gentleman to ask."
But he was disappointed in the result.

"Ay, I know what you mean.  You'd sooner offend me than Bulstrode.  And
what's he?--he's got no land hereabout that ever I heard tell of.  A
speckilating fellow!  He may come down any day, when the devil leaves
off backing him.  And that's what his religion means: he wants God
A'mighty to come in.  That's nonsense!  There's one thing I made out
pretty clear when I used to go to church--and it's this: God A'mighty
sticks to the land.  He promises land, and He gives land, and He makes
chaps rich with corn and cattle.  But you take the other side.  You
like Bulstrode and speckilation better than Featherstone and land."

"I beg your pardon, sir," said Fred, rising, standing with his back to
the fire and beating his boot with his whip.  "I like neither Bulstrode
nor speculation." He spoke rather sulkily, feeling himself stalemated.

"Well, well, you can do without me, that's pretty clear," said old
Featherstone, secretly disliking the possibility that Fred would show
himself at all independent.  "You neither want a bit of land to make a
squire of you instead of a starving parson, nor a lift of a hundred
pound by the way.  It's all one to me.  I can make five codicils if I
like, and I shall keep my bank-notes for a nest-egg. It's all one to
me."

Fred colored again.  Featherstone had rarely given him presents of
money, and at this moment it seemed almost harder to part with the
immediate prospect of bank-notes than with the more distant prospect of
the land.

"I am not ungrateful, sir.  I never meant to show disregard for any
kind intentions you might have towards me.  On the contrary."

"Very good.  Then prove it.  You bring me a letter from Bulstrode
saying he doesn't believe you've been cracking and promising to pay
your debts out o' my land, and then, if there's any scrape you've got
into, we'll see if I can't back you a bit.  Come now!  That's a
bargain.  Here, give me your arm.  I'll try and walk round the room."

Fred, in spite of his irritation, had kindness enough in him to be a
little sorry for the unloved, unvenerated old man, who with his
dropsical legs looked more than usually pitiable in walking.  While
giving his arm, he thought that he should not himself like to be an old
fellow with his constitution breaking up; and he waited
good-temperedly, first before the window to hear the wonted remarks
about the guinea-fowls and the weather-cock, and then before the scanty
book-shelves, of which the chief glories in dark calf were Josephus,
Culpepper, Klopstock's "Messiah," and several volumes of the
"Gentleman's Magazine."

"Read me the names o' the books.  Come now! you're a college man."

Fred gave him the titles.

"What did missy want with more books?  What must you be bringing her
more books for?"

"They amuse her, sir.  She is very fond of reading."

"A little too fond," said Mr. Featherstone, captiously.  "She was for
reading when she sat with me.  But I put a stop to that.  She's got the
newspaper to read out loud.  That's enough for one day, I should think.
I can't abide to see her reading to herself.  You mind and not bring
her any more books, do you hear?"

"Yes, sir, I hear." Fred had received this order before, and had
secretly disobeyed it.  He intended to disobey it again.

"Ring the bell," said Mr. Featherstone; "I want missy to come down."

Rosamond and Mary had been talking faster than their male friends.
They did not think of sitting down, but stood at the toilet-table near
the window while Rosamond took off her hat, adjusted her veil, and
applied little touches of her finger-tips to her hair--hair of
infantine fairness, neither flaxen nor yellow.  Mary Garth seemed all
the plainer standing at an angle between the two nymphs--the one in the
glass, and the one out of it, who looked at each other with eyes of
heavenly blue, deep enough to hold the most exquisite meanings an
ingenious beholder could put into them, and deep enough to hide the
meanings of the owner if these should happen to be less exquisite.
Only a few children in Middlemarch looked blond by the side of
Rosamond, and the slim figure displayed by her riding-habit had
delicate undulations.  In fact, most men in Middlemarch, except her
brothers, held that Miss Vincy was the best girl in the world, and some
called her an angel.  Mary Garth, on the contrary, had the aspect of an
ordinary sinner: she was brown; her curly dark hair was rough and
stubborn; her stature was low; and it would not be true to declare, in
satisfactory antithesis, that she had all the virtues.  Plainness has
its peculiar temptations and vices quite as much as beauty; it is apt
either to feign amiability, or, not feigning it, to show all the
repulsiveness of discontent: at any rate, to be called an ugly thing in
contrast with that lovely creature your companion, is apt to produce
some effect beyond a sense of fine veracity and fitness in the phrase.
At the age of two-and-twenty Mary had certainly not attained that
perfect good sense and good principle which are usually recommended to
the less fortunate girl, as if they were to be obtained in quantities
ready mixed, with a flavor of resignation as required.  Her shrewdness
had a streak of satiric bitterness continually renewed and never
carried utterly out of sight, except by a strong current of gratitude
towards those who, instead of telling her that she ought to be
contented, did something to make her so.  Advancing womanhood had
tempered her plainness, which was of a good human sort, such as the
mothers of our race have very commonly worn in all latitudes under a
more or less becoming headgear.  Rembrandt would have painted her with
pleasure, and would have made her broad features look out of the canvas
with intelligent honesty.  For honesty, truth-telling fairness, was
Mary's reigning virtue: she neither tried to create illusions, nor
indulged in them for her own behoof, and when she was in a good mood
she had humor enough in her to laugh at herself.  When she and Rosamond
happened both to be reflected in the glass, she said, laughingly--

"What a brown patch I am by the side of you, Rosy!  You are the most
unbecoming companion."

"Oh no!  No one thinks of your appearance, you are so sensible and
useful, Mary.  Beauty is of very little consequence in reality," said
Rosamond, turning her head towards Mary, but with eyes swerving towards
the new view of her neck in the glass.

"You mean my beauty," said Mary, rather sardonically.

Rosamond thought, "Poor Mary, she takes the kindest things ill." Aloud
she said, "What have you been doing lately?"

"I?  Oh, minding the house--pouring out syrup--pretending to be amiable
and contented--learning to have a bad opinion of everybody."

"It is a wretched life for you."

"No," said Mary, curtly, with a little toss of her head.  "I think my
life is pleasanter than your Miss Morgan's."

"Yes; but Miss Morgan is so uninteresting, and not young."

"She is interesting to herself, I suppose; and I am not at all sure
that everything gets easier as one gets older."

"No," said Rosamond, reflectively; "one wonders what such people do,
without any prospect.  To be sure, there is religion as a support.
But," she added, dimpling, "it is very different with you, Mary.  You
may have an offer."

"Has any one told you he means to make me one?"

"Of course not.  I mean, there is a gentleman who may fall in love with
you, seeing you almost every day."

A certain change in Mary's face was chiefly determined by the resolve
not to show any change.

"Does that always make people fall in love?" she answered, carelessly;
"it seems to me quite as often a reason for detesting each other."

"Not when they are interesting and agreeable.  I hear that Mr. Lydgate
is both."

"Oh, Mr. Lydgate!" said Mary, with an unmistakable lapse into
indifference.  "You want to know something about him," she added, not
choosing to indulge Rosamond's indirectness.

"Merely, how you like him."

"There is no question of liking at present.  My liking always wants
some little kindness to kindle it.  I am not magnanimous enough to like
people who speak to me without seeming to see me."

"Is he so haughty?" said Rosamond, with heightened satisfaction.  "You
know that he is of good family?"

"No; he did not give that as a reason."

"Mary! you are the oddest girl.  But what sort of looking man is he?
Describe him to me."

"How can one describe a man?  I can give you an inventory: heavy
eyebrows, dark eyes, a straight nose, thick dark hair, large solid
white hands--and--let me see--oh, an exquisite cambric
pocket-handkerchief.  But you will see him.  You know this is about the
time of his visits."

Rosamond blushed a little, but said, meditatively, "I rather like a
haughty manner.  I cannot endure a rattling young man."

"I did not tell you that Mr. Lydgate was haughty; but il y en a pour
tous les gouts, as little Mamselle used to say, and if any girl can
choose the particular sort of conceit she would like, I should think it
is you, Rosy."

"Haughtiness is not conceit; I call Fred conceited."

"I wish no one said any worse of him.  He should be more careful.  Mrs.
Waule has been telling uncle that Fred is very unsteady." Mary spoke
from a girlish impulse which got the better of her judgment.  There was
a vague uneasiness associated with the word "unsteady" which she hoped
Rosamond might say something to dissipate.  But she purposely abstained
from mentioning Mrs. Waule's more special insinuation.

"Oh, Fred is horrid!" said Rosamond.  She would not have allowed
herself so unsuitable a word to any one but Mary.

"What do you mean by horrid?"

"He is so idle, and makes papa so angry, and says he will not take
orders."

"I think Fred is quite right."

"How can you say he is quite right, Mary?  I thought you had more sense
of religion."

"He is not fit to be a clergyman."

"But he ought to be fit."--"Well, then, he is not what he ought to be.
I know some other people who are in the same case."

"But no one approves of them.  I should not like to marry a clergyman;
but there must be clergymen."

"It does not follow that Fred must be one."

"But when papa has been at the expense of educating him for it!  And
only suppose, if he should have no fortune left him?"

"I can suppose that very well," said Mary, dryly.

"Then I wonder you can defend Fred," said Rosamond, inclined to push
this point.

"I don't defend him," said Mary, laughing; "I would defend any parish
from having him for a clergyman."

"But of course if he were a clergyman, he must be different."

"Yes, he would be a great hypocrite; and he is not that yet."

"It is of no use saying anything to you, Mary.  You always take Fred's
part."

"Why should I not take his part?" said Mary, lighting up.  "He would
take mine.  He is the only person who takes the least trouble to oblige
me."

"You make me feel very uncomfortable, Mary," said Rosamond, with her
gravest mildness; "I would not tell mamma for the world."

"What would you not tell her?" said Mary, angrily.

"Pray do not go into a rage, Mary," said Rosamond, mildly as ever.

"If your mamma is afraid that Fred will make me an offer, tell her that
I would not marry him if he asked me.  But he is not going to do so,
that I am aware.  He certainly never has asked me."

"Mary, you are always so violent."

"And you are always so exasperating."

"I?  What can you blame me for?"

"Oh, blameless people are always the most exasperating.  There is the
bell--I think we must go down."

"I did not mean to quarrel," said Rosamond, putting on her hat.

"Quarrel?  Nonsense; we have not quarrelled.  If one is not to get into
a rage sometimes, what is the good of being friends?"

"Am I to repeat what you have said?" "Just as you please.  I never say
what I am afraid of having repeated.  But let us go down."

Mr. Lydgate was rather late this morning, but the visitors stayed long
enough to see him; for Mr. Featherstone asked Rosamond to sing to him,
and she herself was so kind as to propose a second favorite song of
his--"Flow on, thou shining river"--after she had sung "Home, sweet
home" (which she detested). This hard-headed old Overreach approved of
the sentimental song, as the suitable garnish for girls, and also as
fundamentally fine, sentiment being the right thing for a song.

Mr. Featherstone was still applauding the last performance, and
assuring missy that her voice was as clear as a blackbird's, when Mr.
Lydgate's horse passed the window.

His dull expectation of the usual disagreeable routine with an aged
patient--who can hardly believe that medicine would not "set him up" if
the doctor were only clever enough--added to his general disbelief in
Middlemarch charms, made a doubly effective background to this vision
of Rosamond, whom old Featherstone made haste ostentatiously to
introduce as his niece, though he had never thought it worth while to
speak of Mary Garth in that light.  Nothing escaped Lydgate in
Rosamond's graceful behavior: how delicately she waived the notice
which the old man's want of taste had thrust upon her by a quiet
gravity, not showing her dimples on the wrong occasion, but showing
them afterwards in speaking to Mary, to whom she addressed herself with
so much good-natured interest, that Lydgate, after quickly examining
Mary more fully than he had done before, saw an adorable kindness in
Rosamond's eyes.  But Mary from some cause looked rather out of temper.

"Miss Rosy has been singing me a song--you've nothing to say against
that, eh, doctor?" said Mr. Featherstone.  "I like it better than your
physic."

"That has made me forget how the time was going," said Rosamond, rising
to reach her hat, which she had laid aside before singing, so that her
flower-like head on its white stem was seen in perfection above-her
riding-habit. "Fred, we must really go."

"Very good," said Fred, who had his own reasons for not being in the
best spirits, and wanted to get away.

"Miss Vincy is a musician?" said Lydgate, following her with his eyes.
(Every nerve and muscle in Rosamond was adjusted to the consciousness
that she was being looked at.  She was by nature an actress of parts
that entered into her physique: she even acted her own character, and
so well, that she did not know it to be precisely her own.)

"The best in Middlemarch, I'll be bound," said Mr. Featherstone, "let
the next be who she will.  Eh, Fred?  Speak up for your sister."

"I'm afraid I'm out of court, sir.  My evidence would be good for
nothing."

"Middlemarch has not a very high standard, uncle," said Rosamond, with
a pretty lightness, going towards her whip, which lay at a distance.

Lydgate was quick in anticipating her.  He reached the whip before she
did, and turned to present it to her.  She bowed and looked at him: he
of course was looking at her, and their eyes met with that peculiar
meeting which is never arrived at by effort, but seems like a sudden
divine clearance of haze.  I think Lydgate turned a little paler than
usual, but Rosamond blushed deeply and felt a certain astonishment.
After that, she was really anxious to go, and did not know what sort of
stupidity her uncle was talking of when she went to shake hands with
him.

Yet this result, which she took to be a mutual impression, called
falling in love, was just what Rosamond had contemplated beforehand.
Ever since that important new arrival in Middlemarch she had woven a
little future, of which something like this scene was the necessary
beginning.  Strangers, whether wrecked and clinging to a raft, or duly
escorted and accompanied by portmanteaus, have always had a
circumstantial fascination for the virgin mind, against which native
merit has urged itself in vain.  And a stranger was absolutely
necessary to Rosamond's social romance, which had always turned on a
lover and bridegroom who was not a Middlemarcher, and who had no
connections at all like her own: of late, indeed, the construction
seemed to demand that he should somehow be related to a baronet.  Now
that she and the stranger had met, reality proved much more moving than
anticipation, and Rosamond could not doubt that this was the great
epoch of her life.  She judged of her own symptoms as those of
awakening love, and she held it still more natural that Mr. Lydgate
should have fallen in love at first sight of her.  These things
happened so often at balls, and why not by the morning light, when the
complexion showed all the better for it?  Rosamond, though no older
than Mary, was rather used to being fallen in love with; but she, for
her part, had remained indifferent and fastidiously critical towards
both fresh sprig and faded bachelor.  And here was Mr. Lydgate suddenly
corresponding to her ideal, being altogether foreign to Middlemarch,
carrying a certain air of distinction congruous with good family, and
possessing connections which offered vistas of that middle-class
heaven, rank; a man of talent, also, whom it would be especially
delightful to enslave: in fact, a man who had touched her nature quite
newly, and brought a vivid interest into her life which was better than
any fancied "might-be" such as she was in the habit of opposing to the
actual.

Thus, in riding home, both the brother and the sister were preoccupied
and inclined to be silent.  Rosamond, whose basis for her structure had
the usual airy slightness, was of remarkably detailed and realistic
imagination when the foundation had been once presupposed; and before
they had ridden a mile she was far on in the costume and introductions
of her wedded life, having determined on her house in Middlemarch, and
foreseen the visits she would pay to her husband's high-bred relatives
at a distance, whose finished manners she could appropriate as
thoroughly as she had done her school accomplishments, preparing
herself thus for vaguer elevations which might ultimately come.  There
was nothing financial, still less sordid, in her previsions: she cared
about what were considered refinements, and not about the money that
was to pay for them.

Fred's mind, on the other hand, was busy with an anxiety which even his
ready hopefulness could not immediately quell.  He saw no way of
eluding Featherstone's stupid demand without incurring consequences
which he liked less even than the task of fulfilling it.  His father
was already out of humor with him, and would be still more so if he
were the occasion of any additional coolness between his own family and
the Bulstrodes.  Then, he himself hated having to go and speak to his
uncle Bulstrode, and perhaps after drinking wine he had said many
foolish things about Featherstone's property, and these had been
magnified by report.  Fred felt that he made a wretched figure as a
fellow who bragged about expectations from a queer old miser like
Featherstone, and went to beg for certificates at his bidding.
But--those expectations!  He really had them, and he saw no agreeable
alternative if he gave them up; besides, he had lately made a debt
which galled him extremely, and old Featherstone had almost bargained
to pay it off.  The whole affair was miserably small: his debts were
small, even his expectations were not anything so very magnificent.
Fred had known men to whom he would have been ashamed of confessing the
smallness of his scrapes.  Such ruminations naturally produced a streak
of misanthropic bitterness.  To be born the son of a Middlemarch
manufacturer, and inevitable heir to nothing in particular, while such
men as Mainwaring and Vyan--certainly life was a poor business, when a
spirited young fellow, with a good appetite for the best of everything,
had so poor an outlook.

It had not occurred to Fred that the introduction of Bulstrode's name
in the matter was a fiction of old Featherstone's; nor could this have
made any difference to his position.  He saw plainly enough that the
old man wanted to exercise his power by tormenting him a little, and
also probably to get some satisfaction out of seeing him on unpleasant
terms with Bulstrode.  Fred fancied that he saw to the bottom of his
uncle Featherstone's soul, though in reality half what he saw there was
no more than the reflex of his own inclinations.  The difficult task of
knowing another soul is not for young gentlemen whose consciousness is
chiefly made up of their own wishes.

Fred's main point of debate with himself was, whether he should tell
his father, or try to get through the affair without his father's
knowledge.  It was probably Mrs. Waule who had been talking about him;
and if Mary Garth had repeated Mrs. Waule's report to Rosamond, it
would be sure to reach his father, who would as surely question him
about it.  He said to Rosamond, as they slackened their pace--

"Rosy, did Mary tell you that Mrs. Waule had said anything about me?"

"Yes, indeed, she did."

"What?"

"That you were very unsteady."

"Was that all?"

"I should think that was enough, Fred."

"You are sure she said no more?"

"Mary mentioned nothing else.  But really, Fred, I think you ought to
be ashamed."

"Oh, fudge!  Don't lecture me.  What did Mary say about it?"

"I am not obliged to tell you.  You care so very much what Mary says,
and you are too rude to allow me to speak."

"Of course I care what Mary says.  She is the best girl I know."

"I should never have thought she was a girl to fall in love with."

"How do you know what men would fall in love with?  Girls never know."

"At least, Fred, let me advise _you_ not to fall in love with her, for
she says she would not marry you if you asked her."

"She might have waited till I did ask her."

"I knew it would nettle you, Fred."

"Not at all.  She would not have said so if you had not provoked her."
Before reaching home, Fred concluded that he would tell the whole
affair as simply as possible to his father, who might perhaps take on
himself the unpleasant business of speaking to Bulstrode.





BOOK II.




OLD AND YOUNG.



CHAPTER XIII.

    1st Gent. How class your man?--as better than the most,
                 Or, seeming better, worse beneath that cloak?
                 As saint or knave, pilgrim or hypocrite?
    2d Gent.  Nay, tell me how you class your wealth of books
                 The drifted relics of all time.
                 As well sort them at once by size and livery:
                 Vellum, tall copies, and the common calf
                 Will hardly cover more diversity
                 Than all your labels cunningly devised
                 To class your unread authors.


In consequence of what he had heard from Fred, Mr. Vincy determined to
speak with Mr. Bulstrode in his private room at the Bank at half-past
one, when he was usually free from other callers.  But a visitor had
come in at one o'clock, and Mr. Bulstrode had so much to say to him,
that there was little chance of the interview being over in half an
hour.  The banker's speech was fluent, but it was also copious, and he
used up an appreciable amount of time in brief meditative pauses.  Do
not imagine his sickly aspect to have been of the yellow, black-haired
sort: he had a pale blond skin, thin gray-besprinkled brown hair,
light-gray eyes, and a large forehead.  Loud men called his subdued
tone an undertone, and sometimes implied that it was inconsistent with
openness; though there seems to be no reason why a loud man should not
be given to concealment of anything except his own voice, unless it can
be shown that Holy Writ has placed the seat of candor in the lungs.
Mr. Bulstrode had also a deferential bending attitude in listening, and
an apparently fixed attentiveness in his eyes which made those persons
who thought themselves worth hearing infer that he was seeking the
utmost improvement from their discourse.  Others, who expected to make
no great figure, disliked this kind of moral lantern turned on them.
If you are not proud of your cellar, there is no thrill of satisfaction
in seeing your guest hold up his wine-glass to the light and look
judicial.  Such joys are reserved for conscious merit.  Hence Mr.
Bulstrode's close attention was not agreeable to the publicans and
sinners in Middlemarch; it was attributed by some to his being a
Pharisee, and by others to his being Evangelical.  Less superficial
reasoners among them wished to know who his father and grandfather
were, observing that five-and-twenty years ago nobody had ever heard of
a Bulstrode in Middlemarch.  To his present visitor, Lydgate, the
scrutinizing look was a matter of indifference: he simply formed an
unfavorable opinion of the banker's constitution, and concluded that he
had an eager inward life with little enjoyment of tangible things.

"I shall be exceedingly obliged if you will look in on me here
occasionally, Mr. Lydgate," the banker observed, after a brief pause.
"If, as I dare to hope, I have the privilege of finding you a valuable
coadjutor in the interesting matter of hospital management, there will
be many questions which we shall need to discuss in private.  As to the
new hospital, which is nearly finished, I shall consider what you have
said about the advantages of the special destination for fevers.  The
decision will rest with me, for though Lord Medlicote has given the
land and timber for the building, he is not disposed to give his
personal attention to the object."

"There are few things better worth the pains in a provincial town like
this," said Lydgate.  "A fine fever hospital in addition to the old
infirmary might be the nucleus of a medical school here, when once we
get our medical reforms; and what would do more for medical education
than the spread of such schools over the country?  A born provincial
man who has a grain of public spirit as well as a few ideas, should do
what he can to resist the rush of everything that is a little better
than common towards London.  Any valid professional aims may often find
a freer, if not a richer field, in the provinces."

One of Lydgate's gifts was a voice habitually deep and sonorous, yet
capable of becoming very low and gentle at the right moment.  About his
ordinary bearing there was a certain fling, a fearless expectation of
success, a confidence in his own powers and integrity much fortified by
contempt for petty obstacles or seductions of which he had had no
experience.  But this proud openness was made lovable by an expression
of unaffected good-will. Mr. Bulstrode perhaps liked him the better for
the difference between them in pitch and manners; he certainly liked
him the better, as Rosamond did, for being a stranger in Middlemarch.
One can begin so many things with a new person!--even begin to be a
better man.

"I shall rejoice to furnish your zeal with fuller opportunities," Mr.
Bulstrode answered; "I mean, by confiding to you the superintendence of
my new hospital, should a maturer knowledge favor that issue, for I am
determined that so great an object shall not be shackled by our two
physicians.  Indeed, I am encouraged to consider your advent to this
town as a gracious indication that a more manifest blessing is now to
be awarded to my efforts, which have hitherto been much with stood.
With regard to the old infirmary, we have gained the initial point--I
mean your election.  And now I hope you will not shrink from incurring
a certain amount of jealousy and dislike from your professional
brethren by presenting yourself as a reformer."

"I will not profess bravery," said Lydgate, smiling, "but I acknowledge
a good deal of pleasure in fighting, and I should not care for my
profession, if I did not believe that better methods were to be found
and enforced there as well as everywhere else."

"The standard of that profession is low in Middlemarch, my dear sir,"
said the banker.  "I mean in knowledge and skill; not in social status,
for our medical men are most of them connected with respectable
townspeople here.  My own imperfect health has induced me to give some
attention to those palliative resources which the divine mercy has
placed within our reach.  I have consulted eminent men in the
metropolis, and I am painfully aware of the backwardness under which
medical treatment labors in our provincial districts."

"Yes;--with our present medical rules and education, one must be
satisfied now and then to meet with a fair practitioner.  As to all the
higher questions which determine the starting-point of a diagnosis--as
to the philosophy of medical evidence--any glimmering of these can only
come from a scientific culture of which country practitioners have
usually no more notion than the man in the moon."

Mr. Bulstrode, bending and looking intently, found the form which
Lydgate had given to his agreement not quite suited to his
comprehension.  Under such circumstances a judicious man changes the
topic and enters on ground where his own gifts may be more useful.

"I am aware," he said, "that the peculiar bias of medical ability is
towards material means.  Nevertheless, Mr. Lydgate, I hope we shall not
vary in sentiment as to a measure in which you are not likely to be
actively concerned, but in which your sympathetic concurrence may be an
aid to me.  You recognize, I hope; the existence of spiritual interests
in your patients?"

"Certainly I do.  But those words are apt to cover different meanings
to different minds."

"Precisely.  And on such subjects wrong teaching is as fatal as no
teaching.  Now a point which I have much at heart to secure is a new
regulation as to clerical attendance at the old infirmary.  The
building stands in Mr. Farebrother's parish.  You know Mr. Farebrother?"

"I have seen him.  He gave me his vote.  I must call to thank him.  He
seems a very bright pleasant little fellow.  And I understand he is a
naturalist."

"Mr. Farebrother, my dear sir, is a man deeply painful to contemplate.
I suppose there is not a clergyman in this country who has greater
talents."  Mr. Bulstrode paused and looked meditative.

"I have not yet been pained by finding any excessive talent in
Middlemarch," said Lydgate, bluntly.

"What I desire," Mr. Bulstrode continued, looking still more serious,
"is that Mr. Farebrother's attendance at the hospital should be
superseded by the appointment of a chaplain--of Mr. Tyke, in fact--and
that no other spiritual aid should be called in."

"As a medical man I could have no opinion on such a point unless I knew
Mr. Tyke, and even then I should require to know the cases in which he
was applied."  Lydgate smiled, but he was bent on being circumspect.

"Of course you cannot enter fully into the merits of this measure at
present.  But"--here Mr. Bulstrode began to speak with a more chiselled
emphasis--"the subject is likely to be referred to the medical board of
the infirmary, and what I trust I may ask of you is, that in virtue of
the cooperation between us which I now look forward to, you will not,
so far as you are concerned, be influenced by my opponents in this
matter."

"I hope I shall have nothing to do with clerical disputes," said
Lydgate.  "The path I have chosen is to work well in my own profession."

"My responsibility, Mr. Lydgate, is of a broader kind.  With me,
indeed, this question is one of sacred accountableness; whereas with my
opponents, I have good reason to say that it is an occasion for
gratifying a spirit of worldly opposition.  But I shall not therefore
drop one iota of my convictions, or cease to identify myself with that
truth which an evil generation hates.  I have devoted myself to this
object of hospital-improvement, but I will boldly confess to you, Mr.
Lydgate, that I should have no interest in hospitals if I believed that
nothing more was concerned therein than the cure of mortal diseases.  I
have another ground of action, and in the face of persecution I will
not conceal it."

Mr. Bulstrode's voice had become a loud and agitated whisper as he said
the last words.

"There we certainly differ," said Lydgate.  But he was not sorry that
the door was now opened, and Mr. Vincy was announced.  That florid
sociable personage was become more interesting to him since he had seen
Rosamond.  Not that, like her, he had been weaving any future in which
their lots were united; but a man naturally remembers a charming girl
with pleasure, and is willing to dine where he may see her again.
Before he took leave, Mr. Vincy had given that invitation which he had
been "in no hurry about," for Rosamond at breakfast had mentioned that
she thought her uncle Featherstone had taken the new doctor into great
favor.

Mr. Bulstrode, alone with his brother-in-law, poured himself out a
glass of water, and opened a sandwich-box.

"I cannot persuade you to adopt my regimen, Vincy?"

"No, no; I've no opinion of that system.  Life wants padding," said Mr.
Vincy, unable to omit his portable theory.  "However," he went on,
accenting the word, as if to dismiss all irrelevance, "what I came here
to talk about was a little affair of my young scapegrace, Fred's."

"That is a subject on which you and I are likely to take quite as
different views as on diet, Vincy."

"I hope not this time."  (Mr. Vincy was resolved to be good-humored.)
"The fact is, it's about a whim of old Featherstone's. Somebody has
been cooking up a story out of spite, and telling it to the old man, to
try to set him against Fred.  He's very fond of Fred, and is likely to
do something handsome for him; indeed he has as good as told Fred that
he means to leave him his land, and that makes other people jealous."

"Vincy, I must repeat, that you will not get any concurrence from me as
to the course you have pursued with your eldest son.  It was entirely
from worldly vanity that you destined him for the Church: with a family
of three sons and four daughters, you were not warranted in devoting
money to an expensive education which has succeeded in nothing but in
giving him extravagant idle habits.  You are now reaping the
consequences."

To point out other people's errors was a duty that Mr. Bulstrode rarely
shrank from, but Mr. Vincy was not equally prepared to be patient.
When a man has the immediate prospect of being mayor, and is ready, in
the interests of commerce, to take up a firm attitude on politics
generally, he has naturally a sense of his importance to the framework
of things which seems to throw questions of private conduct into the
background.  And this particular reproof irritated him more than any
other.  It was eminently superfluous to him to be told that he was
reaping the consequences.  But he felt his neck under Bulstrode's yoke;
and though he usually enjoyed kicking, he was anxious to refrain from
that relief.

"As to that, Bulstrode, it's no use going back.  I'm not one of your
pattern men, and I don't pretend to be.  I couldn't foresee everything
in the trade; there wasn't a finer business in Middlemarch than ours,
and the lad was clever.  My poor brother was in the Church, and would
have done well--had got preferment already, but that stomach fever took
him off: else he might have been a dean by this time.  I think I was
justified in what I tried to do for Fred.  If you come to religion, it
seems to me a man shouldn't want to carve out his meat to an ounce
beforehand:--one must trust a little to Providence and be generous.
It's a good British feeling to try and raise your family a little: in
my opinion, it's a father's duty to give his sons a fine chance."

"I don't wish to act otherwise than as your best friend, Vincy, when I
say that what you have been uttering just now is one mass of
worldliness and inconsistent folly."

"Very well," said Mr. Vincy, kicking in spite of resolutions, "I never
professed to be anything but worldly; and, what's more, I don't see
anybody else who is not worldly.  I suppose you don't conduct business
on what you call unworldly principles.  The only difference I see is
that one worldliness is a little bit honester than another."

"This kind of discussion is unfruitful, Vincy," said Mr. Bulstrode,
who, finishing his sandwich, had thrown himself back in his chair, and
shaded his eyes as if weary.  "You had some more particular business."

"Yes, yes.  The long and short of it is, somebody has told old
Featherstone, giving you as the authority, that Fred has been borrowing
or trying to borrow money on the prospect of his land.  Of course you
never said any such nonsense.  But the old fellow will insist on it
that Fred should bring him a denial in your handwriting; that is, just
a bit of a note saying you don't believe a word of such stuff, either
of his having borrowed or tried to borrow in such a fool's way.  I
suppose you can have no objection to do that."

"Pardon me.  I have an objection.  I am by no means sure that your son,
in his recklessness and ignorance--I will use no severer word--has not
tried to raise money by holding out his future prospects, or even that
some one may not have been foolish enough to supply him on so vague a
presumption: there is plenty of such lax money-lending as of other
folly in the world."

"But Fred gives me his honor that he has never borrowed money on the
pretence of any understanding about his uncle's land.  He is not a
liar.  I don't want to make him better than he is.  I have blown him up
well--nobody can say I wink at what he does.  But he is not a liar.
And I should have thought--but I may be wrong--that there was no
religion to hinder a man from believing the best of a young fellow,
when you don't know worse.  It seems to me it would be a poor sort of
religion to put a spoke in his wheel by refusing to say you don't
believe such harm of him as you've got no good reason to believe."

"I am not at all sure that I should be befriending your son by
smoothing his way to the future possession of Featherstone's property.
I cannot regard wealth as a blessing to those who use it simply as a
harvest for this world.  You do not like to hear these things, Vincy,
but on this occasion I feel called upon to tell you that I have no
motive for furthering such a disposition of property as that which you
refer to.  I do not shrink from saying that it will not tend to your
son's eternal welfare or to the glory of God.  Why then should you
expect me to pen this kind of affidavit, which has no object but to
keep up a foolish partiality and secure a foolish bequest?"

"If you mean to hinder everybody from having money but saints and
evangelists, you must give up some profitable partnerships, that's all
I can say," Mr. Vincy burst out very bluntly.  "It may be for the glory
of God, but it is not for the glory of the Middlemarch trade, that
Plymdale's house uses those blue and green dyes it gets from the
Brassing manufactory; they rot the silk, that's all I know about it.
Perhaps if other people knew so much of the profit went to the glory of
God, they might like it better.  But I don't mind so much about that--I
could get up a pretty row, if I chose."

Mr. Bulstrode paused a little before he answered.  "You pain me very
much by speaking in this way, Vincy.  I do not expect you to understand
my grounds of action--it is not an easy thing even to thread a path for
principles in the intricacies of the world--still less to make the
thread clear for the careless and the scoffing.  You must remember, if
you please, that I stretch my tolerance towards you as my wife's
brother, and that it little becomes you to complain of me as
withholding material help towards the worldly position of your family.
I must remind you that it is not your own prudence or judgment that has
enabled you to keep your place in the trade."

"Very likely not; but you have been no loser by my trade yet," said Mr.
Vincy, thoroughly nettled (a result which was seldom much retarded by
previous resolutions). "And when you married Harriet, I don't see how
you could expect that our families should not hang by the same nail.
If you've changed your mind, and want my family to come down in the
world, you'd better say so.  I've never changed; I'm a plain Churchman
now, just as I used to be before doctrines came up.  I take the world
as I find it, in trade and everything else.  I'm contented to be no
worse than my neighbors.  But if you want us to come down in the world,
say so.  I shall know better what to do then."

"You talk unreasonably.  Shall you come down in the world for want of
this letter about your son?"

"Well, whether or not, I consider it very unhandsome of you to refuse
it.  Such doings may be lined with religion, but outside they have a
nasty, dog-in-the-manger look.  You might as well slander Fred: it
comes pretty near to it when you refuse to say you didn't set a slander
going.  It's this sort of thing--this tyrannical spirit, wanting to
play bishop and banker everywhere--it's this sort of thing makes a
man's name stink."

"Vincy, if you insist on quarrelling with me, it will be exceedingly
painful to Harriet as well as myself," said Mr. Bulstrode, with a
trifle more eagerness and paleness than usual.

"I don't want to quarrel.  It's for my interest--and perhaps for yours
too--that we should be friends.  I bear you no grudge; I think no worse
of you than I do of other people.  A man who half starves himself, and
goes the length in family prayers, and so on, that you do, believes in
his religion whatever it may be: you could turn over your capital just
as fast with cursing and swearing:--plenty of fellows do.  You like to
be master, there's no denying that; you must be first chop in heaven,
else you won't like it much.  But you're my sister's husband, and we
ought to stick together; and if I know Harriet, she'll consider it your
fault if we quarrel because you strain at a gnat in this way, and
refuse to do Fred a good turn.  And I don't mean to say I shall bear it
well.  I consider it unhandsome."

Mr. Vincy rose, began to button his great-coat, and looked steadily at
his brother-in-law, meaning to imply a demand for a decisive answer.

This was not the first time that Mr. Bulstrode had begun by admonishing
Mr. Vincy, and had ended by seeing a very unsatisfactory reflection of
himself in the coarse unflattering mirror which that manufacturer's
mind presented to the subtler lights and shadows of his fellow-men; and
perhaps his experience ought to have warned him how the scene would
end.  But a full-fed fountain will be generous with its waters even in
the rain, when they are worse than useless; and a fine fount of
admonition is apt to be equally irrepressible.

It was not in Mr. Bulstrode's nature to comply directly in consequence
of uncomfortable suggestions.  Before changing his course, he always
needed to shape his motives and bring them into accordance with his
habitual standard.  He said, at last--

"I will reflect a little, Vincy.  I will mention the subject to
Harriet.  I shall probably send you a letter."

"Very well.  As soon as you can, please.  I hope it will all be settled
before I see you to-morrow."



CHAPTER XIV.

    "Follows here the strict receipt
     For that sauce to dainty meat,
     Named Idleness, which many eat
     By preference, and call it sweet:
     First watch for morsels, like a hound
     Mix well with buffets, stir them round
     With good thick oil of flatteries,
     And froth with mean self-lauding lies.
     Serve warm: the vessels you must choose
     To keep it in are dead men's shoes."


Mr. Bulstrode's consultation of Harriet seemed to have had the effect
desired by Mr. Vincy, for early the next morning a letter came which
Fred could carry to Mr. Featherstone as the required testimony.

The old gentleman was staying in bed on account of the cold weather,
and as Mary Garth was not to be seen in the sitting-room, Fred went
up-stairs immediately and presented the letter to his uncle, who,
propped up comfortably on a bed-rest, was not less able than usual to
enjoy his consciousness of wisdom in distrusting and frustrating
mankind.  He put on his spectacles to read the letter, pursing up his
lips and drawing down their corners.

"Under the circumstances I will not decline to state my
conviction--tchah! what fine words the fellow puts!  He's as fine as an
auctioneer--that your son Frederic has not obtained any advance of
money on bequests promised by Mr. Featherstone--promised? who said I
had ever promised?  I promise nothing--I shall make codicils as long as
I like--and that considering the nature of such a proceeding, it is
unreasonable to presume that a young man of sense and character would
attempt it--ah, but the gentleman doesn't say you are a young man of
sense and character, mark you that, sir!--As to my own concern with any
report of such a nature, I distinctly affirm that I never made any
statement to the effect that your son had borrowed money on any
property that might accrue to him on Mr. Featherstone's demise--bless
my heart! 'property'--accrue--demise!  Lawyer Standish is nothing to
him.  He couldn't speak finer if he wanted to borrow.  Well," Mr.
Featherstone here looked over his spectacles at Fred, while he handed
back the letter to him with a contemptuous gesture, "you don't suppose
I believe a thing because Bulstrode writes it out fine, eh?"

Fred colored.  "You wished to have the letter, sir.  I should think it
very likely that Mr. Bulstrode's denial is as good as the authority
which told you what he denies."

"Every bit.  I never said I believed either one or the other.  And now
what d' you expect?" said Mr. Featherstone, curtly, keeping on his
spectacles, but withdrawing his hands under his wraps.

"I expect nothing, sir."  Fred with difficulty restrained himself from
venting his irritation.  "I came to bring you the letter.  If you like
I will bid you good morning."

"Not yet, not yet.  Ring the bell; I want missy to come."

It was a servant who came in answer to the bell.

"Tell missy to come!" said Mr. Featherstone, impatiently.  "What
business had she to go away?"  He spoke in the same tone when Mary came.

"Why couldn't you sit still here till I told you to go? I want my
waistcoat now.  I told you always to put it on the bed."

Mary's eyes looked rather red, as if she had been crying.  It was clear
that Mr. Featherstone was in one of his most snappish humors this
morning, and though Fred had now the prospect of receiving the
much-needed present of money, he would have preferred being free to
turn round on the old tyrant and tell him that Mary Garth was too good
to be at his beck.  Though Fred had risen as she entered the room, she
had barely noticed him, and looked as if her nerves were quivering with
the expectation that something would be thrown at her.  But she never
had anything worse than words to dread.  When she went to reach the
waistcoat from a peg, Fred went up to her and said, "Allow me."

"Let it alone!  You bring it, missy, and lay it down here," said Mr.
Featherstone.  "Now you go away again till I call you," he added, when
the waistcoat was laid down by him.  It was usual with him to season
his pleasure in showing favor to one person by being especially
disagreeable to another, and Mary was always at hand to furnish the
condiment.  When his own relatives came she was treated better.  Slowly
he took out a bunch of keys from the waistcoat pocket, and slowly he
drew forth a tin box which was under the bed-clothes.

"You expect I am going to give you a little fortune, eh?" he said,
looking above his spectacles and pausing in the act of opening the lid.

"Not at all, sir.  You were good enough to speak of making me a present
the other day, else, of course, I should not have thought of the
matter."  But Fred was of a hopeful disposition, and a vision had
presented itself of a sum just large enough to deliver him from a
certain anxiety.  When Fred got into debt, it always seemed to him
highly probable that something or other--he did not necessarily
conceive what--would come to pass enabling him to pay in due time.  And
now that the providential occurrence was apparently close at hand, it
would have been sheer absurdity to think that the supply would be short
of the need: as absurd as a faith that believed in half a miracle for
want of strength to believe in a whole one.

The deep-veined hands fingered many bank-notes-one after the other,
laying them down flat again, while Fred leaned back in his chair,
scorning to look eager.  He held himself to be a gentleman at heart,
and did not like courting an old fellow for his money.  At last, Mr.
Featherstone eyed him again over his spectacles and presented him with
a little sheaf of notes: Fred could see distinctly that there were but
five, as the less significant edges gaped towards him.  But then, each
might mean fifty pounds.  He took them, saying--

"I am very much obliged to you, sir," and was going to roll them up
without seeming to think of their value.  But this did not suit Mr.
Featherstone, who was eying him intently.

"Come, don't you think it worth your while to count 'em?  You take
money like a lord; I suppose you lose it like one."

"I thought I was not to look a gift-horse in the mouth, sir.  But I
shall be very happy to count them."

Fred was not so happy, however, after he had counted them.  For they
actually presented the absurdity of being less than his hopefulness had
decided that they must be.  What can the fitness of things mean, if not
their fitness to a man's expectations?  Failing this, absurdity and
atheism gape behind him.  The collapse for Fred was severe when he
found that he held no more than five twenties, and his share in the
higher education of this country did not seem to help him.
Nevertheless he said, with rapid changes in his fair complexion--

"It is very handsome of you, sir."

"I should think it is," said Mr. Featherstone, locking his box and
replacing it, then taking off his spectacles deliberately, and at
length, as if his inward meditation had more deeply convinced him,
repeating, "I should think it handsome."

"I assure you, sir, I am very grateful," said Fred, who had had time to
recover his cheerful air.

"So you ought to be.  You want to cut a figure in the world, and I
reckon Peter Featherstone is the only one you've got to trust to." Here
the old man's eyes gleamed with a curiously mingled satisfaction in the
consciousness that this smart young fellow relied upon him, and that
the smart young fellow was rather a fool for doing so.

"Yes, indeed: I was not born to very splendid chances.  Few men have
been more cramped than I have been," said Fred, with some sense of
surprise at his own virtue, considering how hardly he was dealt with.
"It really seems a little too bad to have to ride a broken-winded
hunter, and see men, who, are not half such good judges as yourself,
able to throw away any amount of money on buying bad bargains."

"Well, you can buy yourself a fine hunter now.  Eighty pound is enough
for that, I reckon--and you'll have twenty pound over to get yourself
out of any little scrape," said Mr. Featherstone, chuckling slightly.

"You are very good, sir," said Fred, with a fine sense of contrast
between the words and his feeling.

"Ay, rather a better uncle than your fine uncle Bulstrode.  You won't
get much out of his spekilations, I think.  He's got a pretty strong
string round your father's leg, by what I hear, eh?"

"My father never tells me anything about his affairs, sir."

"Well, he shows some sense there.  But other people find 'em out
without his telling.  _He'll_ never have much to leave you: he'll
most-like die without a will--he's the sort of man to do it--let 'em
make him mayor of Middlemarch as much as they like.  But you won't get
much by his dying without a will, though you _are_ the eldest son."

Fred thought that Mr. Featherstone had never been so disagreeable
before.  True, he had never before given him quite so much money at
once.

"Shall I destroy this letter of Mr. Bulstrode's, sir?" said Fred,
rising with the letter as if he would put it in the fire.

"Ay, ay, I don't want it.  It's worth no money to me."

Fred carried the letter to the fire, and thrust the poker through it
with much zest.  He longed to get out of the room, but he was a little
ashamed before his inner self, as well as before his uncle, to run away
immediately after pocketing the money.  Presently, the farm-bailiff
came up to give his master a report, and Fred, to his unspeakable
relief, was dismissed with the injunction to come again soon.

He had longed not only to be set free from his uncle, but also to find
Mary Garth.  She was now in her usual place by the fire, with sewing in
her hands and a book open on the little table by her side.  Her eyelids
had lost some of their redness now, and she had her usual air of
self-command.

"Am I wanted up-stairs?" she said, half rising as Fred entered.

"No; I am only dismissed, because Simmons is gone up."

Mary sat down again, and resumed her work.  She was certainly treating
him with more indifference than usual: she did not know how
affectionately indignant he had felt on her behalf up-stairs.

"May I stay here a little, Mary, or shall I bore you?"

"Pray sit down," said Mary; "you will not be so heavy a bore as Mr.
John Waule, who was here yesterday, and he sat down without asking my
leave."

"Poor fellow!  I think he is in love with you."

"I am not aware of it.  And to me it is one of the most odious things
in a girl's life, that there must always be some supposition of falling
in love coming between her and any man who is kind to her, and to whom
she is grateful.  I should have thought that I, at least, might have
been safe from all that.  I have no ground for the nonsensical vanity
of fancying everybody who comes near me is in love with me."

Mary did not mean to betray any feeling, but in spite of herself she
ended in a tremulous tone of vexation.

"Confound John Waule!  I did not mean to make you angry.  I didn't know
you had any reason for being grateful to me.  I forgot what a great
service you think it if any one snuffs a candle for you."  Fred also had
his pride, and was not going to show that he knew what had called forth
this outburst of Mary's.

"Oh, I am not angry, except with the ways of the world.  I do like to
be spoken to as if I had common-sense. I really often feel as if I
could understand a little more than I ever hear even from young
gentlemen who have been to college."  Mary had recovered, and she spoke
with a suppressed rippling under-current of laughter pleasant to hear.

"I don't care how merry you are at my expense this morning," said Fred,
"I thought you looked so sad when you came up-stairs. It is a shame you
should stay here to be bullied in that way."

"Oh, I have an easy life--by comparison.  I have tried being a teacher,
and I am not fit for that: my mind is too fond of wandering on its own
way.  I think any hardship is better than pretending to do what one is
paid for, and never really doing it.  Everything here I can do as well
as any one else could; perhaps better than some--Rosy, for example.
Though she is just the sort of beautiful creature that is imprisoned
with ogres in fairy tales."

"_Rosy!_" cried Fred, in a tone of profound brotherly scepticism.

"Come, Fred!" said Mary, emphatically; "you have no right to be so
critical."

"Do you mean anything particular--just now?"

"No, I mean something general--always."

"Oh, that I am idle and extravagant.  Well, I am not fit to be a poor
man.  I should not have made a bad fellow if I had been rich."

"You would have done your duty in that state of life to which it has
not pleased God to call you," said Mary, laughing.

"Well, I couldn't do my duty as a clergyman, any more than you could do
yours as a governess.  You ought to have a little fellow-feeling there,
Mary."

"I never said you ought to be a clergyman.  There are other sorts of
work.  It seems to me very miserable not to resolve on some course and
act accordingly."

"So I could, if--" Fred broke off, and stood up, leaning against the
mantel-piece.

"If you were sure you should not have a fortune?"

"I did not say that.  You want to quarrel with me.  It is too bad of
you to be guided by what other people say about me."

"How can I want to quarrel with you?  I should be quarrelling with all
my new books," said Mary, lifting the volume on the table.  "However
naughty you may be to other people, you are good to me."

"Because I like you better than any one else.  But I know you despise
me."

"Yes, I do--a little," said Mary, nodding, with a smile.

"You would admire a stupendous fellow, who would have wise opinions
about everything."

"Yes, I should."  Mary was sewing swiftly, and seemed provokingly
mistress of the situation.  When a conversation has taken a wrong turn
for us, we only get farther and farther into the swamp of awkwardness.
This was what Fred Vincy felt.

"I suppose a woman is never in love with any one she has always
known--ever since she can remember; as a man often is.  It is always
some new fellow who strikes a girl."

"Let me see," said Mary, the corners of her mouth curling archly; "I
must go back on my experience.  There is Juliet--she seems an example
of what you say.  But then Ophelia had probably known Hamlet a long
while; and Brenda Troil--she had known Mordaunt Merton ever since they
were children; but then he seems to have been an estimable young man;
and Minna was still more deeply in love with Cleveland, who was a
stranger.  Waverley was new to Flora MacIvor; but then she did not fall
in love with him.  And there are Olivia and Sophia Primrose, and
Corinne--they may be said to have fallen in love with new men.
Altogether, my experience is rather mixed."

Mary looked up with some roguishness at Fred, and that look of hers was
very dear to him, though the eyes were nothing more than clear windows
where observation sat laughingly.  He was certainly an affectionate
fellow, and as he had grown from boy to man, he had grown in love with
his old playmate, notwithstanding that share in the higher education of
the country which had exalted his views of rank and income.

"When a man is not loved, it is no use for him to say that he could be
a better fellow--could do anything--I mean, if he were sure of being
loved in return."

"Not of the least use in the world for him to say he _could_ be better.
Might, could, would--they are contemptible auxiliaries."

"I don't see how a man is to be good for much unless he has some one
woman to love him dearly."

"I think the goodness should come before he expects that."

"You know better, Mary.  Women don't love men for their goodness."

"Perhaps not.  But if they love them, they never think them bad."

"It is hardly fair to say I am bad."

"I said nothing at all about you."

"I never shall be good for anything, Mary, if you will not say that you
love me--if you will not promise to marry me--I mean, when I am able to
marry."

"If I did love you, I would not marry you: I would certainly not
promise ever to marry you."

"I think that is quite wicked, Mary.  If you love me, you ought to
promise to marry me."

"On the contrary, I think it would be wicked in me to marry you even if
I did love you."

"You mean, just as I am, without any means of maintaining a wife.  Of
course: I am but three-and-twenty."

"In that last point you will alter.  But I am not so sure of any other
alteration.  My father says an idle man ought not to exist, much less,
be married."

"Then I am to blow my brains out?"

"No; on the whole I should think you would do better to pass your
examination.  I have heard Mr. Farebrother say it is disgracefully
easy."

"That is all very fine.  Anything is easy to him.  Not that cleverness
has anything to do with it.  I am ten times cleverer than many men who
pass."

"Dear me!" said Mary, unable to repress her sarcasm; "that accounts for
the curates like Mr. Crowse.  Divide your cleverness by ten, and the
quotient--dear me!--is able to take a degree.  But that only shows you
are ten times more idle than the others."

"Well, if I did pass, you would not want me to go into the Church?"

"That is not the question--what I want you to do.  You have a
conscience of your own, I suppose.  There! there is Mr. Lydgate.  I
must go and tell my uncle."

"Mary," said Fred, seizing her hand as she rose; "if you will not give
me some encouragement, I shall get worse instead of better."

"I will not give you any encouragement," said Mary, reddening.  "Your
friends would dislike it, and so would mine.  My father would think it
a disgrace to me if I accepted a man who got into debt, and would not
work!"

Fred was stung, and released her hand.  She walked to the door, but
there she turned and said: "Fred, you have always been so good, so
generous to me.  I am not ungrateful.  But never speak to me in that
way again."

"Very well," said Fred, sulkily, taking up his hat and whip.  His
complexion showed patches of pale pink and dead white.  Like many a
plucked idle young gentleman, he was thoroughly in love, and with a
plain girl, who had no money!  But having Mr. Featherstone's land in
the background, and a persuasion that, let Mary say what she would, she
really did care for him, Fred was not utterly in despair.

When he got home, he gave four of the twenties to his mother, asking
her to keep them for him.  "I don't want to spend that money, mother.
I want it to pay a debt with.  So keep it safe away from my fingers."

"Bless you, my dear," said Mrs. Vincy.  She doted on her eldest son and
her youngest girl (a child of six), whom others thought her two
naughtiest children.  The mother's eyes are not always deceived in
their partiality: she at least can best judge who is the tender,
filial-hearted child.  And Fred was certainly very fond of his mother.
Perhaps it was his fondness for another person also that made him
particularly anxious to take some security against his own liability to
spend the hundred pounds.  For the creditor to whom he owed a hundred
and sixty held a firmer security in the shape of a bill signed by
Mary's father.



CHAPTER XV.

    "Black eyes you have left, you say,
     Blue eyes fail to draw you;
     Yet you seem more rapt to-day,
     Than of old we saw you.

    "Oh, I track the fairest fair
     Through new haunts of pleasure;
     Footprints here and echoes there
     Guide me to my treasure:

    "Lo! she turns--immortal youth
     Wrought to mortal stature,
     Fresh as starlight's aged truth--
     Many-named Nature!"


A great historian, as he insisted on calling himself, who had the
happiness to be dead a hundred and twenty years ago, and so to take his
place among the colossi whose huge legs our living pettiness is
observed to walk under, glories in his copious remarks and digressions
as the least imitable part of his work, and especially in those initial
chapters to the successive books of his history, where he seems to
bring his armchair to the proscenium and chat with us in all the lusty
ease of his fine English.  But Fielding lived when the days were longer
(for time, like money, is measured by our needs), when summer
afternoons were spacious, and the clock ticked slowly in the winter
evenings.  We belated historians must not linger after his example; and
if we did so, it is probable that our chat would be thin and eager, as
if delivered from a campstool in a parrot-house.  I at least have so
much to do in unraveling certain human lots, and seeing how they were
woven and interwoven, that all the light I can command must be
concentrated on this particular web, and not dispersed over that
tempting range of relevancies called the universe.

At present I have to make the new settler Lydgate better known to any
one interested in him than he could possibly be even to those who had
seen the most of him since his arrival in Middlemarch.  For surely all
must admit that a man may be puffed and belauded, envied, ridiculed,
counted upon as a tool and fallen in love with, or at least selected as
a future husband, and yet remain virtually unknown--known merely as a
cluster of signs for his neighbors' false suppositions.  There was a
general impression, however, that Lydgate was not altogether a common
country doctor, and in Middlemarch at that time such an impression was
significant of great things being expected from him.  For everybody's
family doctor was remarkably clever, and was understood to have
immeasurable skill in the management and training of the most skittish
or vicious diseases.  The evidence of his cleverness was of the higher
intuitive order, lying in his lady-patients' immovable conviction, and
was unassailable by any objection except that their intuitions were
opposed by others equally strong; each lady who saw medical truth in
Wrench and "the strengthening treatment" regarding Toller and "the
lowering system" as medical perdition.  For the heroic times of copious
bleeding and blistering had not yet departed, still less the times of
thorough-going theory, when disease in general was called by some bad
name, and treated accordingly without shilly-shally--as if, for
example, it were to be called insurrection, which must not be fired on
with blank-cartridge, but have its blood drawn at once.  The
strengtheners and the lowerers were all "clever" men in somebody's
opinion, which is really as much as can be said for any living talents.
Nobody's imagination had gone so far as to conjecture that Mr. Lydgate
could know as much as Dr. Sprague and Dr. Minchin, the two physicians,
who alone could offer any hope when danger was extreme, and when the
smallest hope was worth a guinea.  Still, I repeat, there was a general
impression that Lydgate was something rather more uncommon than any
general practitioner in Middlemarch.  And this was true.  He was but
seven-and-twenty, an age at which many men are not quite common--at
which they are hopeful of achievement, resolute in avoidance, thinking
that Mammon shall never put a bit in their mouths and get astride their
backs, but rather that Mammon, if they have anything to do with him,
shall draw their chariot.

He had been left an orphan when he was fresh from a public school.  His
father, a military man, had made but little provision for three
children, and when the boy Tertius asked to have a medical education,
it seemed easier to his guardians to grant his request by apprenticing
him to a country practitioner than to make any objections on the score
of family dignity.  He was one of the rarer lads who early get a
decided bent and make up their minds that there is something particular
in life which they would like to do for its own sake, and not because
their fathers did it.  Most of us who turn to any subject with love
remember some morning or evening hour when we got on a high stool to
reach down an untried volume, or sat with parted lips listening to a
new talker, or for very lack of books began to listen to the voices
within, as the first traceable beginning of our love.  Something of
that sort happened to Lydgate.  He was a quick fellow, and when hot
from play, would toss himself in a corner, and in five minutes be deep
in any sort of book that he could lay his hands on: if it were Rasselas
or Gulliver, so much the better, but Bailey's Dictionary would do, or
the Bible with the Apocrypha in it.  Something he must read, when he
was not riding the pony, or running and hunting, or listening to the
talk of men.  All this was true of him at ten years of age; he had then
read through "Chrysal, or the Adventures of a Guinea," which was
neither milk for babes, nor any chalky mixture meant to pass for milk,
and it had already occurred to him that books were stuff, and that life
was stupid.  His school studies had not much modified that opinion, for
though he "did" his classics and mathematics, he was not pre-eminent in
them.  It was said of him, that Lydgate could do anything he liked, but
he had certainly not yet liked to do anything remarkable.  He was a
vigorous animal with a ready understanding, but no spark had yet
kindled in him an intellectual passion; knowledge seemed to him a very
superficial affair, easily mastered: judging from the conversation of
his elders, he had apparently got already more than was necessary for
mature life.  Probably this was not an exceptional result of expensive
teaching at that period of short-waisted coats, and other fashions
which have not yet recurred.  But, one vacation, a wet day sent him to
the small home library to hunt once more for a book which might have
some freshness for him: in vain! unless, indeed, he took down a dusty
row of volumes with gray-paper backs and dingy labels--the volumes of
an old Cyclopaedia which he had never disturbed.  It would at least be
a novelty to disturb them.  They were on the highest shelf, and he
stood on a chair to get them down.  But he opened the volume which he
first took from the shelf: somehow, one is apt to read in a makeshift
attitude, just where it might seem inconvenient to do so.  The page he
opened on was under the head of Anatomy, and the first passage that
drew his eyes was on the valves of the heart.  He was not much
acquainted with valves of any sort, but he knew that valvae were
folding-doors, and through this crevice came a sudden light startling
him with his first vivid notion of finely adjusted mechanism in the
human frame.  A liberal education had of course left him free to read
the indecent passages in the school classics, but beyond a general
sense of secrecy and obscenity in connection with his internal
structure, had left his imagination quite unbiassed, so that for
anything he knew his brains lay in small bags at his temples, and he
had no more thought of representing to himself how his blood circulated
than how paper served instead of gold.  But the moment of vocation had
come, and before he got down from his chair, the world was made new to
him by a presentiment of endless processes filling the vast spaces
planked out of his sight by that wordy ignorance which he had supposed
to be knowledge.  From that hour Lydgate felt the growth of an
intellectual passion.

We are not afraid of telling over and over again how a man comes to
fall in love with a woman and be wedded to her, or else be fatally
parted from her.  Is it due to excess of poetry or of stupidity that we
are never weary of describing what King James called a woman's "makdom
and her fairnesse," never weary of listening to the twanging of the old
Troubadour strings, and are comparatively uninterested in that other
kind of "makdom and fairnesse" which must be wooed with industrious
thought and patient renunciation of small desires?  In the story of
this passion, too, the development varies: sometimes it is the glorious
marriage, sometimes frustration and final parting.  And not seldom the
catastrophe is bound up with the other passion, sung by the
Troubadours.  For in the multitude of middle-aged men who go about
their vocations in a daily course determined for them much in the same
way as the tie of their cravats, there is always a good number who once
meant to shape their own deeds and alter the world a little.  The story
of their coming to be shapen after the average and fit to be packed by
the gross, is hardly ever told even in their consciousness; for perhaps
their ardor in generous unpaid toil cooled as imperceptibly as the
ardor of other youthful loves, till one day their earlier self walked
like a ghost in its old home and made the new furniture ghastly.
Nothing in the world more subtle than the process of their gradual
change!  In the beginning they inhaled it unknowingly: you and I may
have sent some of our breath towards infecting them, when we uttered
our conforming falsities or drew our silly conclusions: or perhaps it
came with the vibrations from a woman's glance.

Lydgate did not mean to be one of those failures, and there was the
better hope of him because his scientific interest soon took the form
of a professional enthusiasm: he had a youthful belief in his
bread-winning work, not to be stifled by that initiation in makeshift
called his 'prentice days; and he carried to his studies in London,
Edinburgh, and Paris, the conviction that the medical profession as it
might be was the finest in the world; presenting the most perfect
interchange between science and art; offering the most direct alliance
between intellectual conquest and the social good.  Lydgate's nature
demanded this combination: he was an emotional creature, with a
flesh-and-blood sense of fellowship which withstood all the
abstractions of special study.  He cared not only for "cases," but for
John and Elizabeth, especially Elizabeth.

There was another attraction in his profession: it wanted reform, and
gave a man an opportunity for some indignant resolve to reject its
venal decorations and other humbug, and to be the possessor of genuine
though undemanded qualifications.  He went to study in Paris with the
determination that when he came home again he would settle in some
provincial town as a general practitioner, and resist the
irrational severance between medical and surgical knowledge in the
interest of his own scientific pursuits, as well as of the general
advance: he would keep away from the range of London intrigues,
jealousies, and social truckling, and win celebrity, however slowly, as
Jenner had done, by the independent value of his work.  For it must be
remembered that this was a dark period; and in spite of venerable
colleges which used great efforts to secure purity of knowledge by
making it scarce, and to exclude error by a rigid exclusiveness in
relation to fees and appointments, it happened that very ignorant young
gentlemen were promoted in town, and many more got a legal right to
practise over large areas in the country.  Also, the high standard held
up to the public mind by the College of Physicians, which gave its peculiar
sanction to the expensive and highly rarefied medical instruction
obtained by graduates of Oxford and Cambridge, did not hinder quackery
from having an excellent time of it; for since professional practice
chiefly consisted in giving a great many drugs, the public inferred
that it might be better off with more drugs still, if they could only
be got cheaply, and hence swallowed large cubic measures of physic
prescribed by unscrupulous ignorance which had taken no degrees.
Considering that statistics had not yet embraced a calculation as to
the number of ignorant or canting doctors which absolutely must exist
in the teeth of all changes, it seemed to Lydgate that a change in the
units was the most direct mode of changing the numbers.  He meant to be
a unit who would make a certain amount of difference towards that
spreading change which would one day tell appreciably upon the
averages, and in the mean time have the pleasure of making an
advantageous difference to the viscera of his own patients.  But he did
not simply aim at a more genuine kind of practice than was common.  He
was ambitious of a wider effect: he was fired with the possibility that
he might work out the proof of an anatomical conception and make a link
in the chain of discovery.

Does it seem incongruous to you that a Middlemarch surgeon should dream
of himself as a discoverer?  Most of us, indeed, know little of the
great originators until they have been lifted up among the
constellations and already rule our fates.  But that Herschel, for
example, who "broke the barriers of the heavens"--did he not once play
a provincial church-organ, and give music-lessons to stumbling
pianists?  Each of those Shining Ones had to walk on the earth among
neighbors who perhaps thought much more of his gait and his garments
than of anything which was to give him a title to everlasting fame:
each of them had his little local personal history sprinkled with small
temptations and sordid cares, which made the retarding friction of his
course towards final companionship with the immortals.  Lydgate was not
blind to the dangers of such friction, but he had plenty of confidence
in his resolution to avoid it as far as possible: being
seven-and-twenty, he felt himself experienced.  And he was not going to
have his vanities provoked by contact with the showy worldly successes
of the capital, but to live among people who could hold no rivalry with
that pursuit of a great idea which was to be a twin object with the
assiduous practice of his profession.  There was fascination in the
hope that the two purposes would illuminate each other: the careful
observation and inference which was his daily work, the use of the lens
to further his judgment in special cases, would further his thought as
an instrument of larger inquiry.  Was not this the typical pre-eminence
of his profession?  He would be a good Middlemarch doctor, and by that
very means keep himself in the track of far-reaching investigation.  On
one point he may fairly claim approval at this particular stage of his
career: he did not mean to imitate those philanthropic models who make
a profit out of poisonous pickles to support themselves while they are
exposing adulteration, or hold shares in a gambling-hell that they may
have leisure to represent the cause of public morality.  He intended to
begin in his own case some particular reforms which were quite
certainly within his reach, and much less of a problem than the
demonstrating of an anatomical conception.  One of these reforms was to
act stoutly on the strength of a recent legal decision, and simply
prescribe, without dispensing drugs or taking percentage from
druggists.  This was an innovation for one who had chosen to adopt the
style of general practitioner in a country town, and would be felt as
offensive criticism by his professional brethren.  But Lydgate meant to
innovate in his treatment also, and he was wise enough to see that the
best security for his practising honestly according to his belief was
to get rid of systematic temptations to the contrary.

Perhaps that was a more cheerful time for observers and theorizers than
the present; we are apt to think it the finest era of the world when
America was beginning to be discovered, when a bold sailor, even if he
were wrecked, might alight on a new kingdom; and about 1829 the dark
territories of Pathology were a fine America for a spirited young
adventurer.  Lydgate was ambitious above all to contribute towards
enlarging the scientific, rational basis of his profession.  The more
he became interested in special questions of disease, such as the
nature of fever or fevers, the more keenly he felt the need for that
fundamental knowledge of structure which just at the beginning of the
century had been illuminated by the brief and glorious career of
Bichat, who died when he was only one-and-thirty, but, like another
Alexander, left a realm large enough for many heirs.  That great
Frenchman first carried out the conception that living bodies,
fundamentally considered, are not associations of organs which can be
understood by studying them first apart, and then as it were federally;
but must be regarded as consisting of certain primary webs or tissues,
out of which the various organs--brain, heart, lungs, and so on--are
compacted, as the various accommodations of a house are built up in
various proportions of wood, iron, stone, brick, zinc, and the rest,
each material having its peculiar composition and proportions.  No man,
one sees, can understand and estimate the entire structure or its
parts--what are its frailties and what its repairs, without knowing the
nature of the materials.  And the conception wrought out by Bichat,
with his detailed study of the different tissues, acted necessarily on
medical questions as the turning of gas-light would act on a dim,
oil-lit street, showing new connections and hitherto hidden facts of
structure which must be taken into account in considering the symptoms
of maladies and the action of medicaments.  But results which depend on
human conscience and intelligence work slowly, and now at the end of
1829, most medical practice was still strutting or shambling along the
old paths, and there was still scientific work to be done which might
have seemed to be a direct sequence of Bichat's. This great seer did
not go beyond the consideration of the tissues as ultimate facts in the
living organism, marking the limit of anatomical analysis; but it was
open to another mind to say, have not these structures some common
basis from which they have all started, as your sarsnet, gauze, net,
satin, and velvet from the raw cocoon?  Here would be another light, as
of oxy-hydrogen, showing the very grain of things, and revising all
former explanations.  Of this sequence to Bichat's work, already
vibrating along many currents of the European mind, Lydgate was
enamoured; he longed to demonstrate the more intimate relations of
living structure, and help to define men's thought more accurately
after the true order.  The work had not yet been done, but only
prepared for those who knew how to use the preparation.  What was the
primitive tissue?  In that way Lydgate put the question--not quite in
the way required by the awaiting answer; but such missing of the right
word befalls many seekers.  And he counted on quiet intervals to be
watchfully seized, for taking up the threads of investigation--on many
hints to be won from diligent application, not only of the scalpel, but
of the microscope, which research had begun to use again with new
enthusiasm of reliance.  Such was Lydgate's plan of his future: to do
good small work for Middlemarch, and great work for the world.

He was certainly a happy fellow at this time: to be seven-and-twenty,
without any fixed vices, with a generous resolution that his action
should be beneficent, and with ideas in his brain that made life
interesting quite apart from the cultus of horseflesh and other mystic
rites of costly observance, which the eight hundred pounds left him
after buying his practice would certainly not have gone far in paying
for.  He was at a starting-point which makes many a man's career a fine
subject for betting, if there were any gentlemen given to that
amusement who could appreciate the complicated probabilities of an
arduous purpose, with all the possible thwartings and furtherings of
circumstance, all the niceties of inward balance, by which a man swims
and makes his point or else is carried headlong.  The risk would remain
even with close knowledge of Lydgate's character; for character too is
a process and an unfolding.  The man was still in the making, as much
as the Middlemarch doctor and immortal discoverer, and there were both
virtues and faults capable of shrinking or expanding.  The faults will
not, I hope, be a reason for the withdrawal of your interest in him.
Among our valued friends is there not some one or other who is a little
too self-confident and disdainful; whose distinguished mind is a little
spotted with commonness; who is a little pinched here and protuberant
there with native prejudices; or whose better energies are liable to
lapse down the wrong channel under the influence of transient
solicitations?  All these things might be alleged against Lydgate, but
then, they are the periphrases of a polite preacher, who talks of Adam,
and would not like to mention anything painful to the pew-renters.  The
particular faults from which these delicate generalities are distilled
have distinguishable physiognomies, diction, accent, and grimaces;
filling up parts in very various dramas.  Our vanities differ as our
noses do: all conceit is not the same conceit, but varies in
correspondence with the minutiae of mental make in which one of us
differs from another.  Lydgate's conceit was of the arrogant sort,
never simpering, never impertinent, but massive in its claims and
benevolently contemptuous.  He would do a great deal for noodles, being
sorry for them, and feeling quite sure that they could have no power
over him: he had thought of joining the Saint Simonians when he was in
Paris, in order to turn them against some of their own doctrines.  All
his faults were marked by kindred traits, and were those of a man who
had a fine baritone, whose clothes hung well upon him, and who even in
his ordinary gestures had an air of inbred distinction.  Where then lay
the spots of commonness? says a young lady enamoured of that careless
grace.  How could there be any commonness in a man so well-bred, so
ambitious of social distinction, so generous and unusual in his views
of social duty?  As easily as there may be stupidity in a man of genius
if you take him unawares on the wrong subject, or as many a man who has
the best will to advance the social millennium might be ill-inspired in
imagining its lighter pleasures; unable to go beyond Offenbach's music,
or the brilliant punning in the last burlesque.  Lydgate's spots of
commonness lay in the complexion of his prejudices, which, in spite of
noble intention and sympathy, were half of them such as are found in
ordinary men of the world: that distinction of mind which belonged to
his intellectual ardor, did not penetrate his feeling and judgment
about furniture, or women, or the desirability of its being known
(without his telling) that he was better born than other country
surgeons.  He did not mean to think of furniture at present; but
whenever he did so it was to be feared that neither biology nor schemes
of reform would lift him above the vulgarity of feeling that there
would be an incompatibility in his furniture not being of the best.

As to women, he had once already been drawn headlong by impetuous
folly, which he meant to be final, since marriage at some distant
period would of course not be impetuous.  For those who want to be
acquainted with Lydgate it will be good to know what was that case of
impetuous folly, for it may stand as an example of the fitful swerving
of passion to which he was prone, together with the chivalrous kindness
which helped to make him morally lovable.  The story can be told
without many words.  It happened when he was studying in Paris, and
just at the time when, over and above his other work, he was occupied
with some galvanic experiments.  One evening, tired with his
experimenting, and not being able to elicit the facts he needed, he
left his frogs and rabbits to some repose under their trying and
mysterious dispensation of unexplained shocks, and went to finish his
evening at the theatre of the Porte Saint Martin, where there was a
melodrama which he had already seen several times; attracted, not by
the ingenious work of the collaborating authors, but by an actress
whose part it was to stab her lover, mistaking him for the
evil-designing duke of the piece.  Lydgate was in love with this
actress, as a man is in love with a woman whom he never expects to
speak to.  She was a Provencale, with dark eyes, a Greek profile, and
rounded majestic form, having that sort of beauty which carries a sweet
matronliness even in youth, and her voice was a soft cooing.  She had
but lately come to Paris, and bore a virtuous reputation, her husband
acting with her as the unfortunate lover.  It was her acting which was
"no better than it should be," but the public was satisfied.  Lydgate's
only relaxation now was to go and look at this woman, just as he might
have thrown himself under the breath of the sweet south on a bank of
violets for a while, without prejudice to his galvanism, to which he
would presently return.  But this evening the old drama had a new
catastrophe.  At the moment when the heroine was to act the stabbing of
her lover, and he was to fall gracefully, the wife veritably stabbed
her husband, who fell as death willed.  A wild shriek pierced the
house, and the Provencale fell swooning: a shriek and a swoon were
demanded by the play, but the swooning too was real this time.  Lydgate
leaped and climbed, he hardly knew how, on to the stage, and was active
in help, making the acquaintance of his heroine by finding a contusion
on her head and lifting her gently in his arms.  Paris rang with the
story of this death:--was it a murder?  Some of the actress's warmest
admirers were inclined to believe in her guilt, and liked her the
better for it (such was the taste of those times); but Lydgate was not
one of these.  He vehemently contended for her innocence, and the
remote impersonal passion for her beauty which he had felt before, had
passed now into personal devotion, and tender thought of her lot.  The
notion of murder was absurd: no motive was discoverable, the young
couple being understood to dote on each other; and it was not
unprecedented that an accidental slip of the foot should have brought
these grave consequences.  The legal investigation ended in Madame
Laure's release.  Lydgate by this time had had many interviews with
her, and found her more and more adorable.  She talked little; but that
was an additional charm.  She was melancholy, and seemed grateful; her
presence was enough, like that of the evening light.  Lydgate was madly
anxious about her affection, and jealous lest any other man than
himself should win it and ask her to marry him.  But instead of
reopening her engagement at the Porte Saint Martin, where she would
have been all the more popular for the fatal episode, she left Paris
without warning, forsaking her little court of admirers.  Perhaps no
one carried inquiry far except Lydgate, who felt that all science had
come to a stand-still while he imagined the unhappy Laure, stricken by
ever-wandering sorrow, herself wandering, and finding no faithful
comforter.  Hidden actresses, however, are not so difficult to find as
some other hidden facts, and it was not long before Lydgate gathered
indications that Laure had taken the route to Lyons.  He found her at
last acting with great success at Avignon under the same name, looking
more majestic than ever as a forsaken wife carrying her child in her
arms.  He spoke to her after the play, was received with the usual
quietude which seemed to him beautiful as clear depths of water, and
obtained leave to visit her the next day; when he was bent on telling
her that he adored her, and on asking her to marry him.  He knew that
this was like the sudden impulse of a madman--incongruous even with his
habitual foibles.  No matter!  It was the one thing which he was
resolved to do.  He had two selves within him apparently, and they must
learn to accommodate each other and bear reciprocal impediments.
Strange, that some of us, with quick alternate vision, see beyond our
infatuations, and even while we rave on the heights, behold the wide
plain where our persistent self pauses and awaits us.

To have approached Laure with any suit that was not reverentially
tender would have been simply a contradiction of his whole feeling
towards her.

"You have come all the way from Paris to find me?" she said to him the
next day, sitting before him with folded arms, and looking at him with
eyes that seemed to wonder as an untamed ruminating animal wonders.
"Are all Englishmen like that?"

"I came because I could not live without trying to see you.  You are
lonely; I love you; I want you to consent to be my wife; I will wait,
but I want you to promise that you will marry me--no one else."

Laure looked at him in silence with a melancholy radiance from under
her grand eyelids, until he was full of rapturous certainty, and knelt
close to her knees.

"I will tell you something," she said, in her cooing way, keeping her
arms folded.  "My foot really slipped."

"I know, I know," said Lydgate, deprecatingly.  "It was a fatal
accident--a dreadful stroke of calamity that bound me to you the more."

Again Laure paused a little and then said, slowly, "_I meant to do it._"

Lydgate, strong man as he was, turned pale and trembled: moments seemed
to pass before he rose and stood at a distance from her.

"There was a secret, then," he said at last, even vehemently.  "He was
brutal to you: you hated him."

"No! he wearied me; he was too fond: he would live in Paris, and not in
my country; that was not agreeable to me."

"Great God!" said Lydgate, in a groan of horror.  "And you planned to
murder him?"

"I did not plan: it came to me in the play--_I meant to do it._"

Lydgate stood mute, and unconsciously pressed his hat on while he
looked at her.  He saw this woman--the first to whom he had given his
young adoration--amid the throng of stupid criminals.

"You are a good young man," she said.  "But I do not like husbands.  I
will never have another."

Three days afterwards Lydgate was at his galvanism again in his Paris
chambers, believing that illusions were at an end for him.  He was
saved from hardening effects by the abundant kindness of his heart and
his belief that human life might be made better.  But he had more
reason than ever for trusting his judgment, now that it was so
experienced; and henceforth he would take a strictly scientific view of
woman, entertaining no expectations but such as were justified
beforehand.

No one in Middlemarch was likely to have such a notion of Lydgate's
past as has here been faintly shadowed, and indeed the respectable
townsfolk there were not more given than mortals generally to any eager
attempt at exactness in the representation to themselves of what did
not come under their own senses.  Not only young virgins of that town,
but gray-bearded men also, were often in haste to conjecture how a new
acquaintance might be wrought into their purposes, contented with very
vague knowledge as to the way in which life had been shaping him for
that instrumentality.  Middlemarch, in fact, counted on swallowing
Lydgate and assimilating him very comfortably.



CHAPTER XVI.

    "All that in woman is adored
       In thy fair self I find--
     For the whole sex can but afford
       The handsome and the kind."
                        --SIR CHARLES SEDLEY.


The question whether Mr. Tyke should be appointed as salaried chaplain
to the hospital was an exciting topic to the Middlemarchers; and
Lydgate heard it discussed in a way that threw much light on the power
exercised in the town by Mr. Bulstrode.  The banker was evidently a
ruler, but there was an opposition party, and even among his supporters
there were some who allowed it to be seen that their support was a
compromise, and who frankly stated their impression that the general
scheme of things, and especially the casualties of trade, required you
to hold a candle to the devil.

Mr. Bulstrode's power was not due simply to his being a country banker,
who knew the financial secrets of most traders in the town and could
touch the springs of their credit; it was fortified by a beneficence
that was at once ready and severe--ready to confer obligations, and
severe in watching the result.  He had gathered, as an industrious man
always at his post, a chief share in administering the town charities,
and his private charities were both minute and abundant.  He would take
a great deal of pains about apprenticing Tegg the shoemaker's son, and
he would watch over Tegg's church-going; he would defend Mrs. Strype
the washerwoman against Stubbs's unjust exaction on the score of her
drying-ground, and he would himself scrutinize a calumny against Mrs.
Strype.  His private minor loans were numerous, but he would inquire
strictly into the circumstances both before and after.  In this way a
man gathers a domain in his neighbors' hope and fear as well as
gratitude; and power, when once it has got into that subtle region,
propagates itself, spreading out of all proportion to its external
means.  It was a principle with Mr. Bulstrode to gain as much power as
possible, that he might use it for the glory of God.  He went through a
great deal of spiritual conflict and inward argument in order to adjust
his motives, and make clear to himself what God's glory required.  But,
as we have seen, his motives were not always rightly appreciated.
There were many crass minds in Middlemarch whose reflective scales
could only weigh things in the lump; and they had a strong suspicion
that since Mr. Bulstrode could not enjoy life in their fashion, eating
and drinking so little as he did, and worreting himself about
everything, he must have a sort of vampire's feast in the sense of
mastery.

The subject of the chaplaincy came up at Mr. Vincy's table when Lydgate
was dining there, and the family connection with Mr. Bulstrode did not,
he observed, prevent some freedom of remark even on the part of the
host himself, though his reasons against the proposed arrangement
turned entirely on his objection to Mr. Tyke's sermons, which were all
doctrine, and his preference for Mr. Farebrother, whose sermons were
free from that taint.  Mr. Vincy liked well enough the notion of the
chaplain's having a salary, supposing it were given to Farebrother, who
was as good a little fellow as ever breathed, and the best preacher
anywhere, and companionable too.

"What line shall you take, then?" said Mr. Chichely, the coroner, a
great coursing comrade of Mr. Vincy's.

"Oh, I'm precious glad I'm not one of the Directors now.  I shall vote
for referring the matter to the Directors and the Medical Board
together.  I shall roll some of my responsibility on your shoulders,
Doctor," said Mr. Vincy, glancing first at Dr. Sprague, the senior
physician of the town, and then at Lydgate who sat opposite.  "You
medical gentlemen must consult which sort of black draught you will
prescribe, eh, Mr. Lydgate?"

"I know little of either," said Lydgate; "but in general, appointments
are apt to be made too much a question of personal liking.  The fittest
man for a particular post is not always the best fellow or the most
agreeable.  Sometimes, if you wanted to get a reform, your only way
would be to pension off the good fellows whom everybody is fond of, and
put them out of the question."

Dr. Sprague, who was considered the physician of most "weight," though
Dr. Minchin was usually said to have more "penetration," divested his
large heavy face of all expression, and looked at his wine-glass while
Lydgate was speaking.  Whatever was not problematical and suspected
about this young man--for example, a certain showiness as to foreign
ideas, and a disposition to unsettle what had been settled and
forgotten by his elders--was positively unwelcome to a physician whose
standing had been fixed thirty years before by a treatise on
Meningitis, of which at least one copy marked "own" was bound in calf.
For my part I have some fellow-feeling with Dr. Sprague: one's
self-satisfaction is an untaxed kind of property which it is very
unpleasant to find deprecated.

Lydgate's remark, however, did not meet the sense of the company.  Mr.
Vincy said, that if he could have _his_ way, he would not put
disagreeable fellows anywhere.

"Hang your reforms!" said Mr. Chichely.  "There's no greater humbug in
the world.  You never hear of a reform, but it means some trick to put
in new men.  I hope you are not one of the 'Lancet's' men, Mr.
Lydgate--wanting to take the coronership out of the hands of the legal
profession: your words appear to point that way."

"I disapprove of Wakley," interposed Dr. Sprague, "no man more: he is
an ill-intentioned fellow, who would sacrifice the respectability of
the profession, which everybody knows depends on the London Colleges,
for the sake of getting some notoriety for himself.  There are men who
don't mind about being kicked blue if they can only get talked about.
But Wakley is right sometimes," the Doctor added, judicially.  "I could
mention one or two points in which Wakley is in the right."

"Oh, well," said Mr. Chichely, "I blame no man for standing up in favor
of his own cloth; but, coming to argument, I should like to know how a
coroner is to judge of evidence if he has not had a legal training?"

"In my opinion," said Lydgate, "legal training only makes a man more
incompetent in questions that require knowledge a of another kind.
People talk about evidence as if it could really be weighed in scales
by a blind Justice.  No man can judge what is good evidence on any
particular subject, unless he knows that subject well.  A lawyer is no
better than an old woman at a post-mortem examination.  How is he to
know the action of a poison?  You might as well say that scanning verse
will teach you to scan the potato crops."

"You are aware, I suppose, that it is not the coroner's business to
conduct the post-mortem, but only to take the evidence of the medical
witness?" said Mr. Chichely, with some scorn.

"Who is often almost as ignorant as the coroner himself," said Lydgate.
"Questions of medical jurisprudence ought not to be left to the chance
of decent knowledge in a medical witness, and the coroner ought not to
be a man who will believe that strychnine will destroy the coats of the
stomach if an ignorant practitioner happens to tell him so."

Lydgate had really lost sight of the fact that Mr. Chichely was his
Majesty's coroner, and ended innocently with the question, "Don't you
agree with me, Dr. Sprague?"

"To a certain extent--with regard to populous districts, and in the
metropolis," said the Doctor.  "But I hope it will be long before this
part of the country loses the services of my friend Chichely, even
though it might get the best man in our profession to succeed him.  I
am sure Vincy will agree with me."

"Yes, yes, give me a coroner who is a good coursing man," said Mr.
Vincy, jovially.  "And in my opinion, you're safest with a lawyer.
Nobody can know everything. Most things are 'visitation of God.' And as
to poisoning, why, what you want to know is the law. Come, shall we
join the ladies?"

Lydgate's private opinion was that Mr. Chichely might be the very
coroner without bias as to the coats of the stomach, but he had not
meant to be personal.  This was one of the difficulties of moving in
good Middlemarch society: it was dangerous to insist on knowledge as a
qualification for any salaried office.  Fred Vincy had called Lydgate a
prig, and now Mr. Chichely was inclined to call him prick-eared;
especially when, in the drawing-room, he seemed to be making himself
eminently agreeable to Rosamond, whom he had easily monopolized in a
tete-a-tete, since Mrs. Vincy herself sat at the tea-table. She
resigned no domestic function to her daughter; and the matron's
blooming good-natured face, with the two volatile pink strings floating
from her fine throat, and her cheery manners to husband and children,
was certainly among the great attractions of the Vincy
house--attractions which made it all the easier to fall in love with
the daughter.  The tinge of unpretentious, inoffensive vulgarity in
Mrs. Vincy gave more effect to Rosamond's refinement, which was beyond
what Lydgate had expected.

Certainly, small feet and perfectly turned shoulders aid the impression
of refined manners, and the right thing said seems quite astonishingly
right when it is accompanied with exquisite curves of lip and eyelid.
And Rosamond could say the right thing; for she was clever with that
sort of cleverness which catches every tone except the humorous.
Happily she never attempted to joke, and this perhaps was the most
decisive mark of her cleverness.

She and Lydgate readily got into conversation.  He regretted that he
had not heard her sing the other day at Stone Court.  The only pleasure
he allowed himself during the latter part of his stay in Paris was to
go and hear music.

"You have studied music, probably?" said Rosamond.

"No, I know the notes of many birds, and I know many melodies by ear;
but the music that I don't know at all, and have no notion about,
delights me--affects me.  How stupid the world is that it does not make
more use of such a pleasure within its reach!"

"Yes, and you will find Middlemarch very tuneless.  There are hardly
any good musicians.  I only know two gentlemen who sing at all well."

"I suppose it is the fashion to sing comic songs in a rhythmic way,
leaving you to fancy the tune--very much as if it were tapped on a
drum?"

"Ah, you have heard Mr. Bowyer," said Rosamond, with one of her rare
smiles.  "But we are speaking very ill of our neighbors."

Lydgate was almost forgetting that he must carry on the conversation,
in thinking how lovely this creature was, her garment seeming to be
made out of the faintest blue sky, herself so immaculately blond, as if
the petals of some gigantic flower had just opened and disclosed her;
and yet with this infantine blondness showing so much ready,
self-possessed grace.  Since he had had the memory of Laure, Lydgate
had lost all taste for large-eyed silence: the divine cow no longer
attracted him, and Rosamond was her very opposite.  But he recalled
himself.

"You will let me hear some music to-night, I hope."

"I will let you hear my attempts, if you like," said Rosamond.  "Papa
is sure to insist on my singing.  But I shall tremble before you, who
have heard the best singers in Paris.  I have heard very little: I have
only once been to London.  But our organist at St. Peter's is a good
musician, and I go on studying with him."

"Tell me what you saw in London."

"Very little."  (A more naive girl would have said, "Oh, everything!"
But Rosamond knew better.) "A few of the ordinary sights, such as raw
country girls are always taken to."

"Do you call yourself a raw country girl?" said Lydgate, looking at her
with an involuntary emphasis of admiration, which made Rosamond blush
with pleasure.  But she remained simply serious, turned her long neck a
little, and put up her hand to touch her wondrous hair-plaits--an
habitual gesture with her as pretty as any movements of a kitten's paw.
Not that Rosamond was in the least like a kitten: she was a sylph
caught young and educated at Mrs. Lemon's.

"I assure you my mind is raw," she said immediately; "I pass at
Middlemarch.  I am not afraid of talking to our old neighbors.  But I
am really afraid of you."

"An accomplished woman almost always knows more than we men, though her
knowledge is of a different sort.  I am sure you could teach me a
thousand things--as an exquisite bird could teach a bear if there were
any common language between them.  Happily, there is a common language
between women and men, and so the bears can get taught."

"Ah, there is Fred beginning to strum!  I must go and hinder him from
jarring all your nerves," said Rosamond, moving to the other side of
the room, where Fred having opened the piano, at his father's desire,
that Rosamond might give them some music, was parenthetically
performing "Cherry Ripe!" with one hand.  Able men who have passed
their examinations will do these things sometimes, not less than the
plucked Fred.

"Fred, pray defer your practising till to-morrow; you will make Mr.
Lydgate ill," said Rosamond.  "He has an ear."

Fred laughed, and went on with his tune to the end.

Rosamond turned to Lydgate, smiling gently, and said, "You perceive,
the bears will not always be taught."

"Now then, Rosy!" said Fred, springing from the stool and twisting it
upward for her, with a hearty expectation of enjoyment.  "Some good
rousing tunes first."

Rosamond played admirably.  Her master at Mrs. Lemon's school (close to
a county town with a memorable history that had its relics in church
and castle) was one of those excellent musicians here and there to be
found in our provinces, worthy to compare with many a noted
Kapellmeister in a country which offers more plentiful conditions of
musical celebrity.  Rosamond, with the executant's instinct, had seized
his manner of playing, and gave forth his large rendering of noble
music with the precision of an echo.  It was almost startling, heard
for the first time.  A hidden soul seemed to be flowing forth from
Rosamond's fingers; and so indeed it was, since souls live on in
perpetual echoes, and to all fine expression there goes somewhere an
originating activity, if it be only that of an interpreter.  Lydgate
was taken possession of, and began to believe in her as something
exceptional.  After all, he thought, one need not be surprised to find
the rare conjunctions of nature under circumstances apparently
unfavorable: come where they may, they always depend on conditions that
are not obvious.  He sat looking at her, and did not rise to pay her
any compliments, leaving that to others, now that his admiration was
deepened.

Her singing was less remarkable, but also well trained, and sweet to
hear as a chime perfectly in tune.  It is true she sang "Meet me by
moonlight," and "I've been roaming"; for mortals must share the
fashions of their time, and none but the ancients can be always
classical.  But Rosamond could also sing "Black-eyed Susan" with
effect, or Haydn's canzonets, or "Voi, che sapete," or "Batti,
batti"--she only wanted to know what her audience liked.

Her father looked round at the company, delighting in their admiration.
Her mother sat, like a Niobe before her troubles, with her youngest
little girl on her lap, softly beating the child's hand up and down in
time to the music.  And Fred, notwithstanding his general scepticism
about Rosy, listened to her music with perfect allegiance, wishing he
could do the same thing on his flute.  It was the pleasantest family
party that Lydgate had seen since he came to Middlemarch.  The Vincys
had the readiness to enjoy, the rejection of all anxiety, and the
belief in life as a merry lot, which made a house exceptional in most
county towns at that time, when Evangelicalism had cast a certain
suspicion as of plague-infection over the few amusements which survived
in the provinces.  At the Vincys' there was always whist, and the
card-tables stood ready now, making some of the company secretly
impatient of the music.  Before it ceased Mr. Farebrother came in--a
handsome, broad-chested but otherwise small man, about forty, whose
black was very threadbare: the brilliancy was all in his quick gray
eyes.  He came like a pleasant change in the light, arresting little
Louisa with fatherly nonsense as she was being led out of the room by
Miss Morgan, greeting everybody with some special word, and seeming to
condense more talk into ten minutes than had been held all through the
evening.  He claimed from Lydgate the fulfilment of a promise to come
and see him.  "I can't let you off, you know, because I have some
beetles to show you.  We collectors feel an interest in every new man
till he has seen all we have to show him."

But soon he swerved to the whist-table, rubbing his hands and saying,
"Come now, let us be serious!  Mr. Lydgate? not play?  Ah! you are too
young and light for this kind of thing."

Lydgate said to himself that the clergyman whose abilities were so
painful to Mr. Bulstrode, appeared to have found an agreeable resort in
this certainly not erudite household.  He could half understand it: the
good-humor, the good looks of elder and younger, and the provision for
passing the time without any labor of intelligence, might make the
house beguiling to people who had no particular use for their odd hours.

Everything looked blooming and joyous except Miss Morgan, who was
brown, dull, and resigned, and altogether, as Mrs. Vincy often said,
just the sort of person for a governess.  Lydgate did not mean to pay
many such visits himself.  They were a wretched waste of the evenings;
and now, when he had talked a little more to Rosamond, he meant to
excuse himself and go.

"You will not like us at Middlemarch, I feel sure," she said, when the
whist-players were settled.  "We are very stupid, and you have been
used to something quite different."

"I suppose all country towns are pretty much alike," said Lydgate.
"But I have noticed that one always believes one's own town to be more
stupid than any other.  I have made up my mind to take Middlemarch as
it comes, and shall be much obliged if the town will take me in the
same way.  I have certainly found some charms in it which are much
greater than I had expected."

"You mean the rides towards Tipton and Lowick; every one is pleased
with those," said Rosamond, with simplicity.

"No, I mean something much nearer to me."

Rosamond rose and reached her netting, and then said, "Do you care
about dancing at all?  I am not quite sure whether clever men ever
dance."

"I would dance with you if you would allow me."

"Oh!" said Rosamond, with a slight deprecatory laugh.  "I was only
going to say that we sometimes have dancing, and I wanted to know
whether you would feel insulted if you were asked to come."

"Not on the condition I mentioned."

After this chat Lydgate thought that he was going, but on moving
towards the whist-tables, he got interested in watching Mr.
Farebrother's play, which was masterly, and also his face, which was a
striking mixture of the shrewd and the mild.  At ten o'clock supper was
brought in (such were the customs of Middlemarch) and there was
punch-drinking; but Mr. Farebrother had only a glass of water.  He was
winning, but there seemed to be no reason why the renewal of rubbers
should end, and Lydgate at last took his leave.

But as it was not eleven o'clock, he chose to walk in the brisk air
towards the tower of St. Botolph's, Mr. Farebrother's church, which
stood out dark, square, and massive against the starlight.  It was the
oldest church in Middlemarch; the living, however, was but a vicarage
worth barely four hundred a-year. Lydgate had heard that, and he
wondered now whether Mr. Farebrother cared about the money he won at
cards; thinking, "He seems a very pleasant fellow, but Bulstrode may
have his good reasons."  Many things would be easier to Lydgate if it
should turn out that Mr. Bulstrode was generally justifiable.  "What is
his religious doctrine to me, if he carries some good notions along
with it?  One must use such brains as are to be found."

These were actually Lydgate's first meditations as he walked away from
Mr. Vincy's, and on this ground I fear that many ladies will consider
him hardly worthy of their attention.  He thought of Rosamond and her
music only in the second place; and though, when her turn came, he
dwelt on the image of her for the rest of his walk, he felt no
agitation, and had no sense that any new current had set into his life.
He could not marry yet; he wished not to marry for several years; and
therefore he was not ready to entertain the notion of being in love
with a girl whom he happened to admire.  He did admire Rosamond
exceedingly; but that madness which had once beset him about Laure was
not, he thought, likely to recur in relation to any other woman.
Certainly, if falling in love had been at all in question, it would
have been quite safe with a creature like this Miss Vincy, who had just
the kind of intelligence one would desire in a woman--polished,
refined, docile, lending itself to finish in all the delicacies of
life, and enshrined in a body which expressed this with a force of
demonstration that excluded the need for other evidence.  Lydgate felt
sure that if ever he married, his wife would have that feminine
radiance, that distinctive womanhood which must be classed with flowers
and music, that sort of beauty which by its very nature was virtuous,
being moulded only for pure and delicate joys.

But since he did not mean to marry for the next five years--his more
pressing business was to look into Louis' new book on Fever, which he
was specially interested in, because he had known Louis in Paris, and
had followed many anatomical demonstrations in order to ascertain the
specific differences of typhus and typhoid.  He went home and read far
into the smallest hour, bringing a much more testing vision of details
and relations into this pathological study than he had ever thought it
necessary to apply to the complexities of love and marriage, these
being subjects on which he felt himself amply informed by literature,
and that traditional wisdom which is handed down in the genial
conversation of men.  Whereas Fever had obscure conditions, and gave
him that delightful labor of the imagination which is not mere
arbitrariness, but the exercise of disciplined power--combining and
constructing with the clearest eye for probabilities and the fullest
obedience to knowledge; and then, in yet more energetic alliance with
impartial Nature, standing aloof to invent tests by which to try its
own work.

Many men have been praised as vividly imaginative on the strength of
their profuseness in indifferent drawing or cheap narration:--reports
of very poor talk going on in distant orbs; or portraits of Lucifer
coming down on his bad errands as a large ugly man with bat's wings and
spurts of phosphorescence; or exaggerations of wantonness that seem to
reflect life in a diseased dream.  But these kinds of inspiration
Lydgate regarded as rather vulgar and vinous compared with the
imagination that reveals subtle actions inaccessible by any sort of
lens, but tracked in that outer darkness through long pathways of
necessary sequence by the inward light which is the last refinement of
Energy, capable of bathing even the ethereal atoms in its ideally
illuminated space.  He for his part had tossed away all cheap
inventions where ignorance finds itself able and at ease: he was
enamoured of that arduous invention which is the very eye of research,
provisionally framing its object and correcting it to more and more
exactness of relation; he wanted to pierce the obscurity of those
minute processes which prepare human misery and joy, those invisible
thoroughfares which are the first lurking-places of anguish, mania, and
crime, that delicate poise and transition which determine the growth of
happy or unhappy consciousness.

As he threw down his book, stretched his legs towards the embers in the
grate, and clasped his hands at the back of his head, in that agreeable
afterglow of excitement when thought lapses from examination of a
specific object into a suffusive sense of its connections with all the
rest of our existence--seems, as it were, to throw itself on its back
after vigorous swimming and float with the repose of unexhausted
strength--Lydgate felt a triumphant delight in his studies, and
something like pity for those less lucky men who were not of his
profession.

"If I had not taken that turn when I was a lad," he thought, "I might
have got into some stupid draught-horse work or other, and lived always
in blinkers.  I should never have been happy in any profession that did
not call forth the highest intellectual strain, and yet keep me in good
warm contact with my neighbors.  There is nothing like the medical
profession for that: one can have the exclusive scientific life that
touches the distance and befriend the old fogies in the parish too.  It
is rather harder for a clergyman: Farebrother seems to be an anomaly."

This last thought brought back the Vincys and all the pictures of the
evening.  They floated in his mind agreeably enough, and as he took up
his bed-candle his lips were curled with that incipient smile which is
apt to accompany agreeable recollections.  He was an ardent fellow, but
at present his ardor was absorbed in love of his work and in the
ambition of making his life recognized as a factor in the better life
of mankind--like other heroes of science who had nothing but an obscure
country practice to begin with.

Poor Lydgate! or shall I say, Poor Rosamond!  Each lived in a world of
which the other knew nothing.  It had not occurred to Lydgate that he
had been a subject of eager meditation to Rosamond, who had neither any
reason for throwing her marriage into distant perspective, nor any
pathological studies to divert her mind from that ruminating habit,
that inward repetition of looks, words, and phrases, which makes a
large part in the lives of most girls.  He had not meant to look at her
or speak to her with more than the inevitable amount of admiration and
compliment which a man must give to a beautiful girl; indeed, it seemed
to him that his enjoyment of her music had remained almost silent, for
he feared falling into the rudeness of telling her his great surprise
at her possession of such accomplishment.  But Rosamond had registered
every look and word, and estimated them as the opening incidents of a
preconceived romance--incidents which gather value from the foreseen
development and climax.  In Rosamond's romance it was not necessary to
imagine much about the inward life of the hero, or of his serious
business in the world: of course, he had a profession and was clever,
as well as sufficiently handsome; but the piquant fact about Lydgate
was his good birth, which distinguished him from all Middlemarch
admirers, and presented marriage as a prospect of rising in rank and
getting a little nearer to that celestial condition on earth in which
she would have nothing to do with vulgar people, and perhaps at last
associate with relatives quite equal to the county people who looked
down on the Middlemarchers.  It was part of Rosamond's cleverness to
discern very subtly the faintest aroma of rank, and once when she had
seen the Miss Brookes accompanying their uncle at the county assizes,
and seated among the aristocracy, she had envied them, notwithstanding
their plain dress.

If you think it incredible that to imagine Lydgate as a man of family
could cause thrills of satisfaction which had anything to do with the
sense that she was in love with him, I will ask you to use your power
of comparison a little more effectively, and consider whether red cloth
and epaulets have never had an influence of that sort.  Our passions do
not live apart in locked chambers, but, dressed in their small wardrobe
of notions, bring their provisions to a common table and mess together,
feeding out of the common store according to their appetite.

Rosamond, in fact, was entirely occupied not exactly with Tertius
Lydgate as he was in himself, but with his relation to her; and it was
excusable in a girl who was accustomed to hear that all young men
might, could, would be, or actually were in love with her, to believe
at once that Lydgate could be no exception.  His looks and words meant
more to her than other men's, because she cared more for them: she
thought of them diligently, and diligently attended to that perfection
of appearance, behavior, sentiments, and all other elegancies, which
would find in Lydgate a more adequate admirer than she had yet been
conscious of.

For Rosamond, though she would never do anything that was disagreeable
to her, was industrious; and now more than ever she was active in
sketching her landscapes and market-carts and portraits of friends, in
practising her music, and in being from morning till night her own
standard of a perfect lady, having always an audience in her own
consciousness, with sometimes the not unwelcome addition of a more
variable external audience in the numerous visitors of the house.  She
found time also to read the best novels, and even the second best, and
she knew much poetry by heart.  Her favorite poem was "Lalla Rookh."

"The best girl in the world!  He will be a happy fellow who gets her!"
was the sentiment of the elderly gentlemen who visited the Vincys; and
the rejected young men thought of trying again, as is the fashion in
country towns where the horizon is not thick with coming rivals.  But
Mrs. Plymdale thought that Rosamond had been educated to a ridiculous
pitch, for what was the use of accomplishments which would be all laid
aside as soon as she was married?  While her aunt Bulstrode, who had a
sisterly faithfulness towards her brother's family, had two sincere
wishes for Rosamond--that she might show a more serious turn of mind,
and that she might meet with a husband whose wealth corresponded to her
habits.



CHAPTER XVII.

    "The clerkly person smiled and said
     Promise was a pretty maid,
     But being poor she died unwed."


The Rev. Camden Farebrother, whom Lydgate went to see the next evening,
lived in an old parsonage, built of stone, venerable enough to match
the church which it looked out upon.  All the furniture too in the
house was old, but with another grade of age--that of Mr. Farebrother's
father and grandfather.  There were painted white chairs, with gilding
and wreaths on them, and some lingering red silk damask with slits in
it.  There were engraved portraits of Lord Chancellors and other
celebrated lawyers of the last century; and there were old pier-glasses
to reflect them, as well as the little satin-wood tables and the sofas
resembling a prolongation of uneasy chairs, all standing in relief
against the dark wainscot. This was the physiognomy of the drawing-room
into which Lydgate was shown; and there were three ladies to receive
him, who were also old-fashioned, and of a faded but genuine
respectability: Mrs. Farebrother, the Vicar's white-haired mother,
befrilled and kerchiefed with dainty cleanliness, upright, quick-eyed,
and still under seventy; Miss Noble, her sister, a tiny old lady of
meeker aspect, with frills and kerchief decidedly more worn and mended;
and Miss Winifred Farebrother, the Vicar's elder sister, well-looking
like himself, but nipped and subdued as single women are apt to be who
spend their lives in uninterrupted subjection to their elders.  Lydgate
had not expected to see so quaint a group: knowing simply that Mr.
Farebrother was a bachelor, he had thought of being ushered into a
snuggery where the chief furniture would probably be books and
collections of natural objects.  The Vicar himself seemed to wear
rather a changed aspect, as most men do when acquaintances made
elsewhere see them for the first time in their own homes; some indeed
showing like an actor of genial parts disadvantageously cast for the
curmudgeon in a new piece.  This was not the case with Mr. Farebrother:
he seemed a trifle milder and more silent, the chief talker being his
mother, while he only put in a good-humored moderating remark here and
there.  The old lady was evidently accustomed to tell her company what
they ought to think, and to regard no subject as quite safe without her
steering.  She was afforded leisure for this function by having all her
little wants attended to by Miss Winifred.  Meanwhile tiny Miss Noble
carried on her arm a small basket, into which she diverted a bit of
sugar, which she had first dropped in her saucer as if by mistake;
looking round furtively afterwards, and reverting to her teacup with a
small innocent noise as of a tiny timid quadruped.  Pray think no ill
of Miss Noble.  That basket held small savings from her more portable
food, destined for the children of her poor friends among whom she
trotted on fine mornings; fostering and petting all needy creatures
being so spontaneous a delight to her, that she regarded it much as if
it had been a pleasant vice that she was addicted to.  Perhaps she was
conscious of being tempted to steal from those who had much that she
might give to those who had nothing, and carried in her conscience the
guilt of that repressed desire.  One must be poor to know the luxury of
giving!

Mrs. Farebrother welcomed the guest with a lively formality and
precision.  She presently informed him that they were not often in want
of medical aid in that house.  She had brought up her children to wear
flannel and not to over-eat themselves, which last habit she considered
the chief reason why people needed doctors.  Lydgate pleaded for those
whose fathers and mothers had over-eaten themselves, but Mrs.
Farebrother held that view of things dangerous: Nature was more just
than that; it would be easy for any felon to say that his ancestors
ought to have been hanged instead of him.  If those who had bad fathers
and mothers were bad themselves, they were hanged for that.  There was
no need to go back on what you couldn't see.

"My mother is like old George the Third," said the Vicar, "she objects
to metaphysics."

"I object to what is wrong, Camden.  I say, keep hold of a few plain
truths, and make everything square with them.  When I was young, Mr.
Lydgate, there never was any question about right and wrong.  We knew
our catechism, and that was enough; we learned our creed and our duty.
Every respectable Church person had the same opinions.  But now, if you
speak out of the Prayer-book itself, you are liable to be contradicted."

"That makes rather a pleasant time of it for those who like to maintain
their own point," said Lydgate.

"But my mother always gives way," said the Vicar, slyly.

"No, no, Camden, you must not lead Mr. Lydgate into a mistake about
_me_. I shall never show that disrespect to my parents, to give up what
they taught me.  Any one may see what comes of turning.  If you change
once, why not twenty times?"

"A man might see good arguments for changing once, and not see them for
changing again," said Lydgate, amused with the decisive old lady.

"Excuse me there.  If you go upon arguments, they are never wanting,
when a man has no constancy of mind.  My father never changed, and he
preached plain moral sermons without arguments, and was a good man--few
better.  When you get me a good man made out of arguments, I will get
you a good dinner with reading you the cookery-book. That's my opinion,
and I think anybody's stomach will bear me out."

"About the dinner certainly, mother," said Mr. Farebrother.

"It is the same thing, the dinner or the man.  I am nearly seventy, Mr.
Lydgate, and I go upon experience.  I am not likely to follow new
lights, though there are plenty of them here as elsewhere.  I say, they
came in with the mixed stuffs that will neither wash nor wear.  It was
not so in my youth: a Churchman was a Churchman, and a clergyman, you
might be pretty sure, was a gentleman, if nothing else.  But now he may
be no better than a Dissenter, and want to push aside my son on
pretence of doctrine.  But whoever may wish to push him aside, I am
proud to say, Mr. Lydgate, that he will compare with any preacher in
this kingdom, not to speak of this town, which is but a low standard to
go by; at least, to my thinking, for I was born and bred at Exeter."

"A mother is never partial," said Mr. Farebrother, smiling.  "What do
you think Tyke's mother says about him?"

"Ah, poor creature! what indeed?" said Mrs. Farebrother, her sharpness
blunted for the moment by her confidence in maternal judgments.  "She
says the truth to herself, depend upon it."

"And what is the truth?" said Lydgate. "I am curious to know."

"Oh, nothing bad at all," said Mr. Farebrother.  "He is a zealous
fellow: not very learned, and not very wise, I think--because I don't
agree with him."

"Why, Camden!" said Miss Winifred, "Griffin and his wife told me only
to-day, that Mr. Tyke said they should have no more coals if they came
to hear you preach."

Mrs. Farebrother laid down her knitting, which she had resumed after
her small allowance of tea and toast, and looked at her son as if to
say "You hear that?"  Miss Noble said, "Oh poor things! poor things!"
in reference, probably, to the double loss of preaching and coal.  But
the Vicar answered quietly--

"That is because they are not my parishioners.  And I don't think my
sermons are worth a load of coals to them."

"Mr. Lydgate," said Mrs. Farebrother, who could not let this pass, "you
don't know my son: he always undervalues himself.  I tell him he is
undervaluing the God who made him, and made him a most excellent
preacher."

"That must be a hint for me to take Mr. Lydgate away to my study,
mother," said the Vicar, laughing.  "I promised to show you my
collection," he added, turning to Lydgate; "shall we go?"

All three ladies remonstrated.  Mr. Lydgate ought not to be hurried
away without being allowed to accept another cup of tea: Miss Winifred
had abundance of good tea in the pot.  Why was Camden in such haste to
take a visitor to his den?  There was nothing but pickled vermin, and
drawers full of blue-bottles and moths, with no carpet on the floor.
Mr. Lydgate must excuse it.  A game at cribbage would be far better.
In short, it was plain that a vicar might be adored by his womankind as
the king of men and preachers, and yet be held by them to stand in much
need of their direction.  Lydgate, with the usual shallowness of a
young bachelor, wondered that Mr. Farebrother had not taught them
better.

"My mother is not used to my having visitors who can take any interest
in my hobbies," said the Vicar, as he opened the door of his study,
which was indeed as bare of luxuries for the body as the ladies had
implied, unless a short porcelain pipe and a tobacco-box were to be
excepted.

"Men of your profession don't generally smoke," he said.  Lydgate
smiled and shook his head.  "Nor of mine either, properly, I suppose.
You will hear that pipe alleged against me by Bulstrode and Company.
They don't know how pleased the devil would be if I gave it up."

"I understand.  You are of an excitable temper and want a sedative.  I
am heavier, and should get idle with it.  I should rush into idleness,
and stagnate there with all my might."

"And you mean to give it all to your work.  I am some ten or twelve
years older than you, and have come to a compromise.  I feed a weakness
or two lest they should get clamorous.  See," continued the Vicar,
opening several small drawers, "I fancy I have made an exhaustive study
of the entomology of this district.  I am going on both with the fauna
and flora; but I have at least done my insects well.  We are singularly
rich in orthoptera: I don't know whether--Ah! you have got hold of that
glass jar--you are looking into that instead of my drawers.  You don't
really care about these things?"

"Not by the side of this lovely anencephalous monster.  I have never
had time to give myself much to natural history.  I was early bitten
with an interest in structure, and it is what lies most directly in my
profession.  I have no hobby besides.  I have the sea to swim in there."

"Ah! you are a happy fellow," said Mr. Farebrother, turning on his heel
and beginning to fill his pipe.  "You don't know what it is to want
spiritual tobacco--bad emendations of old texts, or small items about a
variety of Aphis Brassicae, with the well-known signature of
Philomicron, for the 'Twaddler's Magazine;' or a learned treatise on
the entomology of the Pentateuch, including all the insects not
mentioned, but probably met with by the Israelites in their passage
through the desert; with a monograph on the Ant, as treated by Solomon,
showing the harmony of the Book of Proverbs with the results of modern
research.  You don't mind my fumigating you?"

Lydgate was more surprised at the openness of this talk than at its
implied meaning--that the Vicar felt himself not altogether in the
right vocation.  The neat fitting-up of drawers and shelves, and the
bookcase filled with expensive illustrated books on Natural History,
made him think again of the winnings at cards and their destination.
But he was beginning to wish that the very best construction of
everything that Mr. Farebrother did should be the true one.  The
Vicar's frankness seemed not of the repulsive sort that comes from an
uneasy consciousness seeking to forestall the judgment of others, but
simply the relief of a desire to do with as little pretence as
possible.  Apparently he was not without a sense that his freedom of
speech might seem premature, for he presently said--

"I have not yet told you that I have the advantage of you, Mr. Lydgate,
and know you better than you know me.  You remember Trawley who shared
your apartment at Paris for some time?  I was a correspondent of his,
and he told me a good deal about you.  I was not quite sure when you
first came that you were the same man.  I was very glad when I found
that you were.  Only I don't forget that you have not had the like
prologue about me."

Lydgate divined some delicacy of feeling here, but did not half
understand it.  "By the way," he said, "what has become of Trawley?  I
have quite lost sight of him.  He was hot on the French social systems,
and talked of going to the Backwoods to found a sort of Pythagorean
community.  Is he gone?"

"Not at all.  He is practising at a German bath, and has married a rich
patient."

"Then my notions wear the best, so far," said Lydgate, with a short
scornful laugh.  "He would have it, the medical profession was an
inevitable system of humbug.  I said, the fault was in the men--men who
truckle to lies and folly.  Instead of preaching against humbug outside
the walls, it might be better to set up a disinfecting apparatus
within.  In short--I am reporting my own conversation--you may be sure
I had all the good sense on my side."

"Your scheme is a good deal more difficult to carry out than the
Pythagorean community, though.  You have not only got the old Adam in
yourself against you, but you have got all those descendants of the
original Adam who form the society around you.  You see, I have paid
twelve or thirteen years more than you for my knowledge of
difficulties.  But"--Mr. Farebrother broke off a moment, and then
added, "you are eying that glass vase again.  Do you want to make an
exchange?  You shall not have it without a fair barter."

"I have some sea-mice--fine specimens--in spirits.  And I will throw in
Robert Brown's new thing--'Microscopic Observations on the Pollen of
Plants'--if you don't happen to have it already."

"Why, seeing how you long for the monster, I might ask a higher price.
Suppose I ask you to look through my drawers and agree with me about
all my new species?"  The Vicar, while he talked in this way,
alternately moved about with his pipe in his mouth, and returned to
hang rather fondly over his drawers.  "That would be good discipline,
you know, for a young doctor who has to please his patients in
Middlemarch.  You must learn to be bored, remember.  However, you shall
have the monster on your own terms."

"Don't you think men overrate the necessity for humoring everybody's
nonsense, till they get despised by the very fools they humor?" said
Lydgate, moving to Mr. Farebrother's side, and looking rather absently
at the insects ranged in fine gradation, with names subscribed in
exquisite writing.  "The shortest way is to make your value felt, so
that people must put up with you whether you flatter them or not."

"With all my heart.  But then you must be sure of having the value, and
you must keep yourself independent.  Very few men can do that.  Either
you slip out of service altogether, and become good for nothing, or you
wear the harness and draw a good deal where your yoke-fellows pull you.
But do look at these delicate orthoptera!"

Lydgate had after all to give some scrutiny to each drawer, the Vicar
laughing at himself, and yet persisting in the exhibition.

"Apropos of what you said about wearing harness," Lydgate began, after
they had sat down, "I made up my mind some time ago to do with as
little of it as possible. That was why I determined not to try anything
in London, for a good many years at least.  I didn't like what I saw
when I was studying there--so much empty bigwiggism, and obstructive
trickery.  In the country, people have less pretension to knowledge,
and are less of companions, but for that reason they affect one's
amour-propre less: one makes less bad blood, and can follow one's own
course more quietly."

"Yes--well--you have got a good start; you are in the right profession,
the work you feel yourself most fit for.  Some people miss that, and
repent too late.  But you must not be too sure of keeping your
independence."

"You mean of family ties?" said Lydgate, conceiving that these might
press rather tightly on Mr. Farebrother.

"Not altogether.  Of course they make many things more difficult.  But
a good wife--a good unworldly woman--may really help a man, and keep
him more independent.  There's a parishioner of mine--a fine fellow,
but who would hardly have pulled through as he has done without his
wife.  Do you know the Garths?  I think they were not Peacock's
patients."

"No; but there is a Miss Garth at old Featherstone's, at Lowick."

"Their daughter: an excellent girl."

"She is very quiet--I have hardly noticed her."

"She has taken notice of you, though, depend upon it."

"I don't understand," said Lydgate; he could hardly say "Of course."

"Oh, she gauges everybody.  I prepared her for confirmation--she is a
favorite of mine."

Mr. Farebrother puffed a few moments in silence, Lydgate not caring to
know more about the Garths.  At last the Vicar laid down his pipe,
stretched out his legs, and turned his bright eyes with a smile towards
Lydgate, saying--

"But we Middlemarchers are not so tame as you take us to be.  We have
our intrigues and our parties.  I am a party man, for example, and
Bulstrode is another.  If you vote for me you will offend Bulstrode."

"What is there against Bulstrode?" said Lydgate, emphatically.

"I did not say there was anything against him except that.  If you vote
against him you will make him your enemy."

"I don't know that I need mind about that," said Lydgate, rather
proudly; "but he seems to have good ideas about hospitals, and he
spends large sums on useful public objects.  He might help me a good
deal in carrying out my ideas.  As to his religious notions--why, as
Voltaire said, incantations will destroy a flock of sheep if
administered with a certain quantity of arsenic.  I look for the man
who will bring the arsenic, and don't mind about his incantations."

"Very good.  But then you must not offend your arsenic-man. You will
not offend me, you know," said Mr. Farebrother, quite unaffectedly.  "I
don't translate my own convenience into other people's duties.  I am
opposed to Bulstrode in many ways.  I don't like the set he belongs to:
they are a narrow ignorant set, and do more to make their neighbors
uncomfortable than to make them better.  Their system is a sort of
worldly-spiritual cliqueism: they really look on the rest of mankind as
a doomed carcass which is to nourish them for heaven.  But," he added,
smilingly, "I don't say that Bulstrode's new hospital is a bad thing;
and as to his wanting to oust me from the old one--why, if he thinks me
a mischievous fellow, he is only returning a compliment.  And I am not
a model clergyman--only a decent makeshift."

Lydgate was not at all sure that the Vicar maligned himself.  A model
clergyman, like a model doctor, ought to think his own profession the
finest in the world, and take all knowledge as mere nourishment to his
moral pathology and therapeutics.  He only said, "What reason does
Bulstrode give for superseding you?"

"That I don't teach his opinions--which he calls spiritual religion;
and that I have no time to spare.  Both statements are true.  But then
I could make time, and I should be glad of the forty pounds.  That is
the plain fact of the case.  But let us dismiss it.  I only wanted to
tell you that if you vote for your arsenic-man, you are not to cut me
in consequence.  I can't spare you.  You are a sort of circumnavigator
come to settle among us, and will keep up my belief in the antipodes.
Now tell me all about them in Paris."



CHAPTER XVIII.

    "Oh, sir, the loftiest hopes on earth
     Draw lots with meaner hopes: heroic breasts,
     Breathing bad air, ran risk of pestilence;
     Or, lacking lime-juice when they cross the Line,
     May languish with the scurvy."


Some weeks passed after this conversation before the question of the
chaplaincy gathered any practical import for Lydgate, and without
telling himself the reason, he deferred the predetermination on which
side he should give his vote.  It would really have been a matter of
total indifference to him--that is to say, he would have taken the more
convenient side, and given his vote for the appointment of Tyke without
any hesitation--if he had not cared personally for Mr. Farebrother.

But his liking for the Vicar of St. Botolph's grew with growing
acquaintanceship.  That, entering into Lydgate's position as a
new-comer who had his own professional objects to secure, Mr.
Farebrother should have taken pains rather to warn off than to obtain
his interest, showed an unusual delicacy and generosity, which
Lydgate's nature was keenly alive to.  It went along with other points
of conduct in Mr. Farebrother which were exceptionally fine, and made
his character resemble those southern landscapes which seem divided
between natural grandeur and social slovenliness.  Very few men could
have been as filial and chivalrous as he was to the mother, aunt, and
sister, whose dependence on him had in many ways shaped his life rather
uneasily for himself; few men who feel the pressure of small needs are
so nobly resolute not to dress up their inevitably self-interested
desires in a pretext of better motives.  In these matters he was
conscious that his life would bear the closest scrutiny; and perhaps
the consciousness encouraged a little defiance towards the critical
strictness of persons whose celestial intimacies seemed not to improve
their domestic manners, and whose lofty aims were not needed to account
for their actions.  Then, his preaching was ingenious and pithy, like
the preaching of the English Church in its robust age, and his sermons
were delivered without book.  People outside his parish went to hear
him; and, since to fill the church was always the most difficult part
of a clergyman's function, here was another ground for a careless sense
of superiority.  Besides, he was a likable man: sweet-tempered,
ready-witted, frank, without grins of suppressed bitterness or other
conversational flavors which make half of us an affliction to our
friends.  Lydgate liked him heartily, and wished for his friendship.

With this feeling uppermost, he continued to waive the question of the
chaplaincy, and to persuade himself that it was not only no proper
business of his, but likely enough never to vex him with a demand for
his vote.  Lydgate, at Mr. Bulstrode's request, was laying down plans
for the internal arrangements of the new hospital, and the two were
often in consultation.  The banker was always presupposing that he
could count in general on Lydgate as a coadjutor, but made no special
recurrence to the coming decision between Tyke and Farebrother.  When
the General Board of the Infirmary had met, however, and Lydgate had
notice that the question of the chaplaincy was thrown on a council of
the directors and medical men, to meet on the following Friday, he had
a vexed sense that he must make up his mind on this trivial Middlemarch
business.  He could not help hearing within him the distinct
declaration that Bulstrode was prime minister, and that the Tyke affair
was a question of office or no office; and he could not help an equally
pronounced dislike to giving up the prospect of office.  For his
observation was constantly confirming Mr. Farebrother's assurance that
the banker would not overlook opposition.  "Confound their petty
politics!" was one of his thoughts for three mornings in the meditative
process of shaving, when he had begun to feel that he must really hold
a court of conscience on this matter.  Certainly there were valid
things to be said against the election of Mr. Farebrother: he had too
much on his hands already, especially considering how much time he
spent on non-clerical occupations.  Then again it was a continually
repeated shock, disturbing Lydgate's esteem, that the Vicar should
obviously play for the sake of money, liking the play indeed, but
evidently liking some end which it served.  Mr. Farebrother contended
on theory for the desirability of all games, and said that Englishmen's
wit was stagnant for want of them; but Lydgate felt certain that he
would have played very much less but for the money.  There was a
billiard-room at the Green Dragon, which some anxious mothers and wives
regarded as the chief temptation in Middlemarch.  The Vicar was a
first-rate billiard-player, and though he did not frequent the Green
Dragon, there were reports that he had sometimes been there in the
daytime and had won money.  And as to the chaplaincy, he did not
pretend that he cared for it, except for the sake of the forty pounds.
Lydgate was no Puritan, but he did not care for play, and winning money
at it had always seemed a meanness to him; besides, he had an ideal of
life which made this subservience of conduct to the gaining of small
sums thoroughly hateful to him.  Hitherto in his own life his wants had
been supplied without any trouble to himself, and his first impulse was
always to be liberal with half-crowns as matters of no importance to a
gentleman; it had never occurred to him to devise a plan for getting
half-crowns.  He had always known in a general way that he was not
rich, but he had never felt poor, and he had no power of imagining the
part which the want of money plays in determining the actions of men.
Money had never been a motive to him.  Hence he was not ready to frame
excuses for this deliberate pursuit of small gains.  It was altogether
repulsive to him, and he never entered into any calculation of the
ratio between the Vicar's income and his more or less necessary
expenditure.  It was possible that he would not have made such a
calculation in his own case.

And now, when the question of voting had come, this repulsive fact told
more strongly against Mr. Farebrother than it had done before.  One
would know much better what to do if men's characters were more
consistent, and especially if one's friends were invariably fit for any
function they desired to undertake!  Lydgate was convinced that if
there had been no valid objection to Mr. Farebrother, he would have
voted for him, whatever Bulstrode might have felt on the subject: he
did not intend to be a vassal of Bulstrode's. On the other hand, there
was Tyke, a man entirely given to his clerical office, who was simply
curate at a chapel of ease in St. Peter's parish, and had time for
extra duty.  Nobody had anything to say against Mr. Tyke, except that
they could not bear him, and suspected him of cant.  Really, from his
point of view, Bulstrode was thoroughly justified.

But whichever way Lydgate began to incline, there was something to make
him wince; and being a proud man, he was a little exasperated at being
obliged to wince.  He did not like frustrating his own best purposes by
getting on bad terms with Bulstrode; he did not like voting against
Farebrother, and helping to deprive him of function and salary; and the
question occurred whether the additional forty pounds might not leave
the Vicar free from that ignoble care about winning at cards.
Moreover, Lydgate did not like the consciousness that in voting for
Tyke he should be voting on the side obviously convenient for himself.
But would the end really be his own convenience?  Other people would
say so, and would allege that he was currying favor with Bulstrode for
the sake of making himself important and getting on in the world.  What
then?  He for his own part knew that if his personal prospects simply
had been concerned, he would not have cared a rotten nut for the
banker's friendship or enmity.  What he really cared for was a medium
for his work, a vehicle for his ideas; and after all, was he not bound
to prefer the object of getting a good hospital, where he could
demonstrate the specific distinctions of fever and test therapeutic
results, before anything else connected with this chaplaincy?  For the
first time Lydgate was feeling the hampering threadlike pressure of
small social conditions, and their frustrating complexity.  At the end
of his inward debate, when he set out for the hospital, his hope was
really in the chance that discussion might somehow give a new aspect to
the question, and make the scale dip so as to exclude the necessity for
voting.  I think he trusted a little also to the energy which is
begotten by circumstances--some feeling rushing warmly and making
resolve easy, while debate in cool blood had only made it more
difficult.  However it was, he did not distinctly say to himself on
which side he would vote; and all the while he was inwardly resenting
the subjection which had been forced upon him.  It would have seemed
beforehand like a ridiculous piece of bad logic that he, with his
unmixed resolutions of independence and his select purposes, would find
himself at the very outset in the grasp of petty alternatives, each of
which was repugnant to him.  In his student's chambers, he had
prearranged his social action quite differently.

Lydgate was late in setting out, but Dr. Sprague, the two other
surgeons, and several of the directors had arrived early; Mr.
Bulstrode, treasurer and chairman, being among those who were still
absent.  The conversation seemed to imply that the issue was
problematical, and that a majority for Tyke was not so certain as had
been generally supposed.  The two physicians, for a wonder, turned out
to be unanimous, or rather, though of different minds, they concurred
in action.  Dr. Sprague, the rugged and weighty, was, as every one had
foreseen, an adherent of Mr. Farebrother.  The Doctor was more than
suspected of having no religion, but somehow Middlemarch tolerated this
deficiency in him as if he had been a Lord Chancellor; indeed it is
probable that his professional weight was the more believed in, the
world-old association of cleverness with the evil principle being still
potent in the minds even of lady-patients who had the strictest ideas
of frilling and sentiment.  It was perhaps this negation in the Doctor
which made his neighbors call him hard-headed and dry-witted;
conditions of texture which were also held favorable to the storing of
judgments connected with drugs.  At all events, it is certain that if
any medical man had come to Middlemarch with the reputation of having
very definite religious views, of being given to prayer, and of
otherwise showing an active piety, there would have been a general
presumption against his medical skill.

On this ground it was (professionally speaking) fortunate for Dr.
Minchin that his religious sympathies were of a general kind, and such
as gave a distant medical sanction to all serious sentiment, whether of
Church or Dissent, rather than any adhesion to particular tenets.  If
Mr. Bulstrode insisted, as he was apt to do, on the Lutheran doctrine
of justification, as that by which a Church must stand or fall, Dr.
Minchin in return was quite sure that man was not a mere machine or a
fortuitous conjunction of atoms; if Mrs. Wimple insisted on a
particular providence in relation to her stomach complaint, Dr. Minchin
for his part liked to keep the mental windows open and objected to
fixed limits; if the Unitarian brewer jested about the Athanasian
Creed, Dr. Minchin quoted Pope's "Essay on Man."  He objected to the
rather free style of anecdote in which Dr. Sprague indulged, preferring
well-sanctioned quotations, and liking refinement of all kinds: it was
generally known that he had some kinship to a bishop, and sometimes
spent his holidays at "the palace."

Dr. Minchin was soft-handed, pale-complexioned, and of rounded outline,
not to be distinguished from a mild clergyman in appearance: whereas
Dr. Sprague was superfluously tall; his trousers got creased at the
knees, and showed an excess of boot at a time when straps seemed
necessary to any dignity of bearing; you heard him go in and out, and
up and down, as if he had come to see after the roofing.  In short, he
had weight, and might be expected to grapple with a disease and throw
it; while Dr. Minchin might be better able to detect it lurking and to
circumvent it.  They enjoyed about equally the mysterious privilege of
medical reputation, and concealed with much etiquette their contempt
for each other's skill.  Regarding themselves as Middlemarch
institutions, they were ready to combine against all innovators, and
against non-professionals given to interference.  On this ground they
were both in their hearts equally averse to Mr. Bulstrode, though Dr.
Minchin had never been in open hostility with him, and never differed
from him without elaborate explanation to Mrs. Bulstrode, who had found
that Dr. Minchin alone understood her constitution.  A layman who pried
into the professional conduct of medical men, and was always obtruding
his reforms,--though he was less directly embarrassing to the two
physicians than to the surgeon-apothecaries who attended paupers by
contract, was nevertheless offensive to the professional nostril as
such; and Dr. Minchin shared fully in the new pique against Bulstrode,
excited by his apparent determination to patronize Lydgate.  The
long-established practitioners, Mr. Wrench and Mr. Toller; were just
now standing apart and having a friendly colloquy, in which they agreed
that Lydgate was a jackanapes, just made to serve Bulstrode's purpose.
To non-medical friends they had already concurred in praising the other
young practitioner, who had come into the town on Mr. Peacock's
retirement without further recommendation than his own merits and such
argument for solid professional acquirement as might be gathered from
his having apparently wasted no time on other branches of knowledge.
It was clear that Lydgate, by not dispensing drugs, intended to cast
imputations on his equals, and also to obscure the limit between his
own rank as a general practitioner and that of the physicians, who, in
the interest of the profession, felt bound to maintain its various
grades,--especially against a man who had not been to either of the
English universities and enjoyed the absence of anatomical and bedside
study there, but came with a libellous pretension to experience in
Edinburgh and Paris, where observation might be abundant indeed, but
hardly sound.

Thus it happened that on this occasion Bulstrode became identified with
Lydgate, and Lydgate with Tyke; and owing to this variety of
interchangeable names for the chaplaincy question, diverse minds were
enabled to form the same judgment concerning it.

Dr. Sprague said at once bluntly to the group assembled when he
entered, "I go for Farebrother.  A salary, with all my heart.  But why
take it from the Vicar?  He has none too much--has to insure his life,
besides keeping house, and doing a vicar's charities.  Put forty pounds
in his pocket and you'll do no harm.  He's a good fellow, is
Farebrother, with as little of the parson about him as will serve to
carry orders."

"Ho, ho!  Doctor," said old Mr. Powderell, a retired iron-monger of
some standing--his interjection being something between a laugh and a
Parliamentary disapproval; "we must let you have your say.  But what we
have to consider is not anybody's income--it's the souls of the poor
sick people"--here Mr. Powderell's voice and face had a sincere pathos
in them.  "He is a real Gospel preacher, is Mr. Tyke.  I should vote
against my conscience if I voted against Mr. Tyke--I should indeed."

"Mr. Tyke's opponents have not asked any one to vote against his
conscience, I believe," said Mr. Hackbutt, a rich tanner of fluent
speech, whose glittering spectacles and erect hair were turned with
some severity towards innocent Mr. Powderell.  "But in my judgment it
behoves us, as Directors, to consider whether we will regard it as our
whole business to carry out propositions emanating from a single
quarter.  Will any member of the committee aver that he would have
entertained the idea of displacing the gentleman who has always
discharged the function of chaplain here, if it had not been suggested
to him by parties whose disposition it is to regard every institution
of this town as a machinery for carrying out their own views?  I tax no
man's motives: let them lie between himself and a higher Power; but I
do say, that there are influences at work here which are incompatible
with genuine independence, and that a crawling servility is usually
dictated by circumstances which gentlemen so conducting themselves
could not afford either morally or financially to avow.  I myself am a
layman, but I have given no inconsiderable attention to the divisions
in the Church and--"

"Oh, damn the divisions!" burst in Mr. Frank Hawley, lawyer and
town-clerk, who rarely presented himself at the board, but now looked
in hurriedly, whip in hand.  "We have nothing to do with them here.
Farebrother has been doing the work--what there was--without pay, and
if pay is to be given, it should be given to him.  I call it a
confounded job to take the thing away from Farebrother."

"I think it would be as well for gentlemen not to give their remarks a
personal bearing," said Mr. Plymdale.  "I shall vote for the
appointment of Mr. Tyke, but I should not have known, if Mr. Hackbutt
hadn't hinted it, that I was a Servile Crawler."

"I disclaim any personalities.  I expressly said, if I may be allowed
to repeat, or even to conclude what I was about to say--"

"Ah, here's Minchin!" said Mr. Frank Hawley; at which everybody turned
away from Mr. Hackbutt, leaving him to feel the uselessness of superior
gifts in Middlemarch.  "Come, Doctor, I must have you on the right
side, eh?"

"I hope so," said Dr. Minchin, nodding and shaking hands here and
there; "at whatever cost to my feelings."

"If there's any feeling here, it should be feeling for the man who is
turned out, I think," said Mr. Frank Hawley.

"I confess I have feelings on the other side also.  I have a divided
esteem," said Dr. Minchin, rubbing his hands.  "I consider Mr. Tyke an
exemplary man--none more so--and I believe him to be proposed from
unimpeachable motives.  I, for my part, wish that I could give him my
vote.  But I am constrained to take a view of the case which gives the
preponderance to Mr. Farebrother's claims.  He is an amiable man, an
able preacher, and has been longer among us."

Old Mr. Powderell looked on, sad and silent.  Mr. Plymdale settled his
cravat, uneasily.

"You don't set up Farebrother as a pattern of what a clergyman ought to
be, I hope," said Mr. Larcher, the eminent carrier, who had just come
in.  "I have no ill-will towards him, but I think we owe something to
the public, not to speak of anything higher, in these appointments.  In
my opinion Farebrother is too lax for a clergyman.  I don't wish to
bring up particulars against him; but he will make a little attendance
here go as far as he can."

"And a devilish deal better than too much," said Mr. Hawley, whose bad
language was notorious in that part of the county.  "Sick people can't
bear so much praying and preaching.  And that methodistical sort of
religion is bad for the spirits--bad for the inside, eh?" he added,
turning quickly round to the four medical men who were assembled.

But any answer was dispensed with by the entrance of three gentlemen,
with whom there were greetings more or less cordial.  These were the
Reverend Edward Thesiger, Rector of St. Peter's, Mr. Bulstrode, and our
friend Mr. Brooke of Tipton, who had lately allowed himself to be put
on the board of directors in his turn, but had never before attended,
his attendance now being due to Mr. Bulstrode's exertions.  Lydgate was
the only person still expected.

Every one now sat down, Mr. Bulstrode presiding, pale and
self-restrained as usual.  Mr. Thesiger, a moderate evangelical, wished
for the appointment of his friend Mr. Tyke, a zealous able man, who,
officiating at a chapel of ease, had not a cure of souls too extensive
to leave him ample time for the new duty.  It was desirable that
chaplaincies of this kind should be entered on with a fervent
intention: they were peculiar opportunities for spiritual influence;
and while it was good that a salary should be allotted, there was the
more need for scrupulous watching lest the office should be perverted
into a mere question of salary.  Mr. Thesiger's manner had so much
quiet propriety that objectors could only simmer in silence.

Mr. Brooke believed that everybody meant well in the matter.  He had
not himself attended to the affairs of the Infirmary, though he had a
strong interest in whatever was for the benefit of Middlemarch, and was
most happy to meet the gentlemen present on any public question--"any
public question, you know," Mr. Brooke repeated, with his nod of
perfect understanding.  "I am a good deal occupied as a magistrate, and
in the collection of documentary evidence, but I regard my time as
being at the disposal of the public--and, in short, my friends have
convinced me that a chaplain with a salary--a salary, you know--is a
very good thing, and I am happy to be able to come here and vote for
the appointment of Mr. Tyke, who, I understand, is an unexceptionable
man, apostolic and eloquent and everything of that kind--and I am the
last man to withhold my vote--under the circumstances, you know."

"It seems to me that you have been crammed with one side of the
question, Mr. Brooke," said Mr. Frank Hawley, who was afraid of nobody,
and was a Tory suspicious of electioneering intentions.  "You don't
seem to know that one of the worthiest men we have has been doing duty
as chaplain here for years without pay, and that Mr. Tyke is proposed
to supersede him."

"Excuse me, Mr. Hawley," said Mr. Bulstrode.  "Mr. Brooke has been
fully informed of Mr. Farebrother's character and position."

"By his enemies," flashed out Mr. Hawley.

"I trust there is no personal hostility concerned here," said Mr.
Thesiger.

"I'll swear there is, though," retorted Mr. Hawley.

"Gentlemen," said Mr. Bulstrode, in a subdued tone, "the merits of the
question may be very briefly stated, and if any one present doubts that
every gentleman who is about to give his vote has not been fully
informed, I can now recapitulate the considerations that should weigh
on either side."

"I don't see the good of that," said Mr. Hawley.  "I suppose we all
know whom we mean to vote for.  Any man who wants to do justice does
not wait till the last minute to hear both sides of the question.  I
have no time to lose, and I propose that the matter be put to the vote
at once."

A brief but still hot discussion followed before each person wrote
"Tyke" or "Farebrother" on a piece of paper and slipped it into a glass
tumbler; and in the mean time Mr. Bulstrode saw Lydgate enter.

"I perceive that the votes are equally divided at present," said Mr.
Bulstrode, in a clear biting voice.  Then, looking up at Lydgate--

"There is a casting-vote still to be given.  It is yours, Mr. Lydgate:
will you be good enough to write?"

"The thing is settled now," said Mr. Wrench, rising.  "We all know how
Mr. Lydgate will vote."

"You seem to speak with some peculiar meaning, sir," said Lydgate,
rather defiantly, and keeping his pencil suspended.

"I merely mean that you are expected to vote with Mr. Bulstrode.  Do
you regard that meaning as offensive?"

"It may be offensive to others.  But I shall not desist from voting
with him on that account."  Lydgate immediately wrote down "Tyke."

So the Rev. Walter Tyke became chaplain to the Infirmary, and Lydgate
continued to work with Mr. Bulstrode.  He was really uncertain whether
Tyke were not the more suitable candidate, and yet his consciousness
told him that if he had been quite free from indirect bias he should
have voted for Mr. Farebrother.  The affair of the chaplaincy remained
a sore point in his memory as a case in which this petty medium of
Middlemarch had been too strong for him.  How could a man be satisfied
with a decision between such alternatives and under such circumstances?
No more than he can be satisfied with his hat, which he has chosen from
among such shapes as the resources of the age offer him, wearing it at
best with a resignation which is chiefly supported by comparison.

But Mr. Farebrother met him with the same friendliness as before.  The
character of the publican and sinner is not always practically
incompatible with that of the modern Pharisee, for the majority of us
scarcely see more distinctly the faultiness of our own conduct than the
faultiness of our own arguments, or the dulness of our own jokes.  But
the Vicar of St. Botolph's had certainly escaped the slightest tincture
of the Pharisee, and by dint of admitting to himself that he was too
much as other men were, he had become remarkably unlike them in
this--that he could excuse others for thinking slightly of him, and
could judge impartially of their conduct even when it told against him.

"The world has been too strong for _me_, I know," he said one day to
Lydgate.  "But then I am not a mighty man--I shall never be a man of
renown.  The choice of Hercules is a pretty fable; but Prodicus makes
it easy work for the hero, as if the first resolves were enough.
Another story says that he came to hold the distaff, and at last wore
the Nessus shirt.  I suppose one good resolve might keep a man right if
everybody else's resolve helped him."

The Vicar's talk was not always inspiriting: he had escaped being a
Pharisee, but he had not escaped that low estimate of possibilities
which we rather hastily arrive at as an inference from our own failure.
Lydgate thought that there was a pitiable infirmity of will in Mr.
Farebrother.



CHAPTER XIX.

    "L' altra vedete ch'ha fatto alla guancia
     Della sua palma, sospirando, letto."
                              --Purgatorio, vii.


When George the Fourth was still reigning over the privacies of
Windsor, when the Duke of Wellington was Prime Minister, and Mr. Vincy
was mayor of the old corporation in Middlemarch, Mrs. Casaubon, born
Dorothea Brooke, had taken her wedding journey to Rome.  In those days
the world in general was more ignorant of good and evil by forty years
than it is at present.  Travellers did not often carry full information
on Christian art either in their heads or their pockets; and even the
most brilliant English critic of the day mistook the flower-flushed
tomb of the ascended Virgin for an ornamental vase due to the painter's
fancy.  Romanticism, which has helped to fill some dull blanks with
love and knowledge, had not yet penetrated the times with its leaven
and entered into everybody's food; it was fermenting still as a
distinguishable vigorous enthusiasm in certain long-haired German
artists at Rome, and the youth of other nations who worked or idled
near them were sometimes caught in the spreading movement.

One fine morning a young man whose hair was not immoderately long, but
abundant and curly, and who was otherwise English in his equipment, had
just turned his back on the Belvedere Torso in the Vatican and was
looking out on the magnificent view of the mountains from the adjoining
round vestibule.  He was sufficiently absorbed not to notice the
approach of a dark-eyed, animated German who came up to him and placing
a hand on his shoulder, said with a strong accent, "Come here, quick!
else she will have changed her pose."

Quickness was ready at the call, and the two figures passed lightly
along by the Meleager, towards the hall where the reclining Ariadne,
then called the Cleopatra, lies in the marble voluptuousness of her
beauty, the drapery folding around her with a petal-like ease and
tenderness.  They were just in time to see another figure standing
against a pedestal near the reclining marble: a breathing blooming
girl, whose form, not shamed by the Ariadne, was clad in Quakerish gray
drapery; her long cloak, fastened at the neck, was thrown backward from
her arms, and one beautiful ungloved hand pillowed her cheek, pushing
somewhat backward the white beaver bonnet which made a sort of halo to
her face around the simply braided dark-brown hair.  She was not
looking at the sculpture, probably not thinking of it: her large eyes
were fixed dreamily on a streak of sunlight which fell across the
floor.  But she became conscious of the two strangers who suddenly
paused as if to contemplate the Cleopatra, and, without looking at
them, immediately turned away to join a maid-servant and courier who
were loitering along the hall at a little distance off.

"What do you think of that for a fine bit of antithesis?" said the
German, searching in his friend's face for responding admiration, but
going on volubly without waiting for any other answer.  "There lies
antique beauty, not corpse-like even in death, but arrested in the
complete contentment of its sensuous perfection: and here stands beauty
in its breathing life, with the consciousness of Christian centuries in
its bosom.  But she should be dressed as a nun; I think she looks
almost what you call a Quaker; I would dress her as a nun in my
picture.  However, she is married; I saw her wedding-ring on that
wonderful left hand, otherwise I should have thought the sallow
Geistlicher was her father.  I saw him parting from her a good while
ago, and just now I found her in that magnificent pose.  Only think! he
is perhaps rich, and would like to have her portrait taken.  Ah! it is
no use looking after her--there she goes!  Let us follow her home!"

"No, no," said his companion, with a little frown.

"You are singular, Ladislaw.  You look struck together.  Do you know
her?"

"I know that she is married to my cousin," said Will Ladislaw,
sauntering down the hall with a preoccupied air, while his German
friend kept at his side and watched him eagerly.

"What! the Geistlicher? He looks more like an uncle--a more useful sort
of relation."

"He is not my uncle.  I tell you he is my second cousin," said
Ladislaw, with some irritation.

"Schon, schon.  Don't be snappish.  You are not angry with me for
thinking Mrs. Second-Cousin the most perfect young Madonna I ever saw?"

"Angry? nonsense.  I have only seen her once before, for a couple of
minutes, when my cousin introduced her to me, just before I left
England.  They were not married then.  I didn't know they were coming
to Rome."

"But you will go to see them now--you will find out what they have for
an address--since you know the name.  Shall we go to the post?  And you
could speak about the portrait."

"Confound you, Naumann!  I don't know what I shall do.  I am not so
brazen as you."

"Bah! that is because you are dilettantish and amateurish.  If you were
an artist, you would think of Mistress Second-Cousin as antique form
animated by Christian sentiment--a sort of Christian Antigone--sensuous
force controlled by spiritual passion."

"Yes, and that your painting her was the chief outcome of her
existence--the divinity passing into higher completeness and all but
exhausted in the act of covering your bit of canvas.  I am amateurish
if you like: I do _not_ think that all the universe is straining
towards the obscure significance of your pictures."

"But it is, my dear!--so far as it is straining through me, Adolf
Naumann: that stands firm," said the good-natured painter, putting a
hand on Ladislaw's shoulder, and not in the least disturbed by the
unaccountable touch of ill-humor in his tone.  "See now!  My existence
presupposes the existence of the whole universe--does it _not?_ and my
function is to paint--and as a painter I have a conception which is
altogether genialisch, of your great-aunt or second grandmother as a
subject for a picture; therefore, the universe is straining towards
that picture through that particular hook or claw which it puts forth
in the shape of me--not true?"

"But how if another claw in the shape of me is straining to thwart
it?--the case is a little less simple then."

"Not at all: the result of the struggle is the same thing--picture or
no picture--logically."

Will could not resist this imperturbable temper, and the cloud in his
face broke into sunshiny laughter.

"Come now, my friend--you will help?" said Naumann, in a hopeful tone.

"No; nonsense, Naumann!  English ladies are not at everybody's service
as models.  And you want to express too much with your painting.  You
would only have made a better or worse portrait with a background which
every connoisseur would give a different reason for or against.  And
what is a portrait of a woman?  Your painting and Plastik are poor
stuff after all.  They perturb and dull conceptions instead of raising
them.  Language is a finer medium."

"Yes, for those who can't paint," said Naumann.  "There you have
perfect right.  I did not recommend you to paint, my friend."

The amiable artist carried his sting, but Ladislaw did not choose to
appear stung.  He went on as if he had not heard.

"Language gives a fuller image, which is all the better for beings
vague.  After all, the true seeing is within; and painting stares at
you with an insistent imperfection.  I feel that especially about
representations of women.  As if a woman were a mere colored
superficies!  You must wait for movement and tone.  There is a
difference in their very breathing: they change from moment to
moment.--This woman whom you have just seen, for example: how would you
paint her voice, pray?  But her voice is much diviner than anything you
have seen of her."

"I see, I see.  You are jealous.  No man must presume to think that he
can paint your ideal.  This is serious, my friend!  Your great-aunt!
'Der Neffe als Onkel' in a tragic sense--ungeheuer!"

"You and I shall quarrel, Naumann, if you call that lady my aunt again."

"How is she to be called then?"

"Mrs. Casaubon."

"Good.  Suppose I get acquainted with her in spite of you, and find
that she very much wishes to be painted?"

"Yes, suppose!" said Will Ladislaw, in a contemptuous undertone,
intended to dismiss the subject.  He was conscious of being irritated
by ridiculously small causes, which were half of his own creation.  Why
was he making any fuss about Mrs. Casaubon?  And yet he felt as if
something had happened to him with regard to her.  There are characters
which are continually creating collisions and nodes for themselves in
dramas which nobody is prepared to act with them.  Their
susceptibilities will clash against objects that remain innocently
quiet.



CHAPTER XX.

    "A child forsaken, waking suddenly,
     Whose gaze afeard on all things round doth rove,
     And seeth only that it cannot see
     The meeting eyes of love."


Two hours later, Dorothea was seated in an inner room or boudoir of a
handsome apartment in the Via Sistina.

I am sorry to add that she was sobbing bitterly, with such abandonment
to this relief of an oppressed heart as a woman habitually controlled
by pride on her own account and thoughtfulness for others will
sometimes allow herself when she feels securely alone.  And Mr.
Casaubon was certain to remain away for some time at the Vatican.

Yet Dorothea had no distinctly shapen grievance that she could state
even to herself; and in the midst of her confused thought and passion,
the mental act that was struggling forth into clearness was a
self-accusing cry that her feeling of desolation was the fault of her
own spiritual poverty.  She had married the man of her choice, and with
the advantage over most girls that she had contemplated her marriage
chiefly as the beginning of new duties: from the very first she had
thought of Mr. Casaubon as having a mind so much above her own, that he
must often be claimed by studies which she could not entirely share;
moreover, after the brief narrow experience of her girlhood she was
beholding Rome, the city of visible history, where the past of a whole
hemisphere seems moving in funeral procession with strange ancestral
images and trophies gathered from afar.

But this stupendous fragmentariness heightened the dreamlike
strangeness of her bridal life.  Dorothea had now been five weeks in
Rome, and in the kindly mornings when autumn and winter seemed to go
hand in hand like a happy aged couple one of whom would presently
survive in chiller loneliness, she had driven about at first with Mr.
Casaubon, but of late chiefly with Tantripp and their experienced
courier.  She had been led through the best galleries, had been taken
to the chief points of view, had been shown the grandest ruins and the
most glorious churches, and she had ended by oftenest choosing to drive
out to the Campagna where she could feel alone with the earth and sky,
away-from the oppressive masquerade of ages, in which her own life too
seemed to become a masque with enigmatical costumes.

To those who have looked at Rome with the quickening power of a
knowledge which breathes a growing soul into all historic shapes, and
traces out the suppressed transitions which unite all contrasts, Rome
may still be the spiritual centre and interpreter of the world.  But
let them conceive one more historical contrast: the gigantic broken
revelations of that Imperial and Papal city thrust abruptly on the
notions of a girl who had been brought up in English and Swiss
Puritanism, fed on meagre Protestant histories and on art chiefly of
the hand-screen sort; a girl whose ardent nature turned all her small
allowance of knowledge into principles, fusing her actions into their
mould, and whose quick emotions gave the most abstract things the
quality of a pleasure or a pain; a girl who had lately become a wife,
and from the enthusiastic acceptance of untried duty found herself
plunged in tumultuous preoccupation with her personal lot.  The weight
of unintelligible Rome might lie easily on bright nymphs to whom it
formed a background for the brilliant picnic of Anglo-foreign society;
but Dorothea had no such defence against deep impressions.  Ruins and
basilicas, palaces and colossi, set in the midst of a sordid present,
where all that was living and warm-blooded seemed sunk in the deep
degeneracy of a superstition divorced from reverence; the dimmer but
yet eager Titanic life gazing and struggling on walls and ceilings; the
long vistas of white forms whose marble eyes seemed to hold the
monotonous light of an alien world: all this vast wreck of ambitious
ideals, sensuous and spiritual, mixed confusedly with the signs of
breathing forgetfulness and degradation, at first jarred her as with an
electric shock, and then urged themselves on her with that ache
belonging to a glut of confused ideas which check the flow of emotion.
Forms both pale and glowing took possession of her young sense, and
fixed themselves in her memory even when she was not thinking of them,
preparing strange associations which remained through her after-years.
Our moods are apt to bring with them images which succeed each other
like the magic-lantern pictures of a doze; and in certain states of
dull forlornness Dorothea all her life continued to see the vastness of
St. Peter's, the huge bronze canopy, the excited intention in the
attitudes and garments of the prophets and evangelists in the mosaics
above, and the red drapery which was being hung for Christmas spreading
itself everywhere like a disease of the retina.

Not that this inward amazement of Dorothea's was anything very
exceptional: many souls in their young nudity are tumbled out among
incongruities and left to "find their feet" among them, while their
elders go about their business.  Nor can I suppose that when Mrs.
Casaubon is discovered in a fit of weeping six weeks after her wedding,
the situation will be regarded as tragic.  Some discouragement, some
faintness of heart at the new real future which replaces the imaginary,
is not unusual, and we do not expect people to be deeply moved by what
is not unusual.  That element of tragedy which lies in the very fact of
frequency, has not yet wrought itself into the coarse emotion of
mankind; and perhaps our frames could hardly bear much of it.  If we
had a keen vision and feeling of all ordinary human life, it would be
like hearing the grass grow and the squirrel's heart beat, and we
should die of that roar which lies on the other side of silence.  As it
is, the quickest of us walk about well wadded with stupidity.

However, Dorothea was crying, and if she had been required to state the
cause, she could only have done so in some such general words as I have
already used: to have been driven to be more particular would have been
like trying to give a history of the lights and shadows, for that new
real future which was replacing the imaginary drew its material from
the endless minutiae by which her view of Mr. Casaubon and her wifely
relation, now that she was married to him, was gradually changing with
the secret motion of a watch-hand from what it had been in her maiden
dream.  It was too early yet for her fully to recognize or at least
admit the change, still more for her to have readjusted that
devotedness which was so necessary a part of her mental life that she
was almost sure sooner or later to recover it.  Permanent rebellion,
the disorder of a life without some loving reverent resolve, was not
possible to her; but she was now in an interval when the very force of
her nature heightened its confusion.  In this way, the early months of
marriage often are times of critical tumult--whether that of a
shrimp-pool or of deeper waters--which afterwards subsides into
cheerful peace.

But was not Mr. Casaubon just as learned as before?  Had his forms of
expression changed, or his sentiments become less laudable?  Oh
waywardness of womanhood! did his chronology fail him, or his ability
to state not only a theory but the names of those who held it; or his
provision for giving the heads of any subject on demand?  And was not
Rome the place in all the world to give free play to such
accomplishments?  Besides, had not Dorothea's enthusiasm especially
dwelt on the prospect of relieving the weight and perhaps the sadness
with which great tasks lie on him who has to achieve them?--  And that
such weight pressed on Mr. Casaubon was only plainer than before.

All these are crushing questions; but whatever else remained the same,
the light had changed, and you cannot find the pearly dawn at noonday.
The fact is unalterable, that a fellow-mortal with whose nature you are
acquainted solely through the brief entrances and exits of a few
imaginative weeks called courtship, may, when seen in the continuity of
married companionship, be disclosed as something better or worse than
what you have preconceived, but will certainly not appear altogether
the same.  And it would be astonishing to find how soon the change is
felt if we had no kindred changes to compare with it.  To share
lodgings with a brilliant dinner-companion, or to see your favorite
politician in the Ministry, may bring about changes quite as rapid: in
these cases too we begin by knowing little and believing much, and we
sometimes end by inverting the quantities.

Still, such comparisons might mislead, for no man was more incapable of
flashy make-believe than Mr. Casaubon: he was as genuine a character as
any ruminant animal, and he had not actively assisted in creating any
illusions about himself.  How was it that in the weeks since her
marriage, Dorothea had not distinctly observed but felt with a stifling
depression, that the large vistas and wide fresh air which she had
dreamed of finding in her husband's mind were replaced by anterooms and
winding passages which seemed to lead nowhither?  I suppose it was that
in courtship everything is regarded as provisional and preliminary, and
the smallest sample of virtue or accomplishment is taken to guarantee
delightful stores which the broad leisure of marriage will reveal.  But
the door-sill of marriage once crossed, expectation is concentrated on
the present.  Having once embarked on your marital voyage, it is
impossible not to be aware that you make no way and that the sea is not
within sight--that, in fact, you are exploring an enclosed basin.

In their conversation before marriage, Mr. Casaubon had often dwelt on
some explanation or questionable detail of which Dorothea did not see
the bearing; but such imperfect coherence seemed due to the brokenness
of their intercourse, and, supported by her faith in their future, she
had listened with fervid patience to a recitation of possible arguments
to be brought against Mr. Casaubon's entirely new view of the
Philistine god Dagon and other fish-deities, thinking that hereafter
she should see this subject which touched him so nearly from the same
high ground whence doubtless it had become so important to him.  Again,
the matter-of-course statement and tone of dismissal with which he
treated what to her were the most stirring thoughts, was easily
accounted for as belonging to the sense of haste and preoccupation in
which she herself shared during their engagement.  But now, since they
had been in Rome, with all the depths of her emotion roused to
tumultuous activity, and with life made a new problem by new elements,
she had been becoming more and more aware, with a certain terror, that
her mind was continually sliding into inward fits of anger and
repulsion, or else into forlorn weariness.  How far the judicious
Hooker or any other hero of erudition would have been the same at Mr.
Casaubon's time of life, she had no means of knowing, so that he could
not have the advantage of comparison; but her husband's way of
commenting on the strangely impressive objects around them had begun to
affect her with a sort of mental shiver: he had perhaps the best
intention of acquitting himself worthily, but only of acquitting
himself.  What was fresh to her mind was worn out to his; and such
capacity of thought and feeling as had ever been stimulated in him by
the general life of mankind had long shrunk to a sort of dried
preparation, a lifeless embalmment of knowledge.

When he said, "Does this interest you, Dorothea?  Shall we stay a
little longer?  I am ready to stay if you wish it,"--it seemed to her
as if going or staying were alike dreary.  Or, "Should you like to go
to the Farnesina, Dorothea?  It contains celebrated frescos designed or
painted by Raphael, which most persons think it worth while to visit."

"But do you care about them?" was always Dorothea's question.

"They are, I believe, highly esteemed.  Some of them represent the
fable of Cupid and Psyche, which is probably the romantic invention of
a literary period, and cannot, I think, be reckoned as a genuine
mythical product.  But if you like these wall-paintings we can easily
drive thither; and you will then, I think, have seen the chief works of
Raphael, any of which it were a pity to omit in a visit to Rome.  He is
the painter who has been held to combine the most complete grace of
form with sublimity of expression.  Such at least I have gathered to be
the opinion of cognoscenti."

This kind of answer given in a measured official tone, as of a
clergyman reading according to the rubric, did not help to justify the
glories of the Eternal City, or to give her the hope that if she knew
more about them the world would be joyously illuminated for her.  There
is hardly any contact more depressing to a young ardent creature than
that of a mind in which years full of knowledge seem to have issued in
a blank absence of interest or sympathy.

On other subjects indeed Mr. Casaubon showed a tenacity of occupation
and an eagerness which are usually regarded as the effect of
enthusiasm, and Dorothea was anxious to follow this spontaneous
direction of his thoughts, instead of being made to feel that she
dragged him away from it.  But she was gradually ceasing to expect with
her former delightful confidence that she should see any wide opening
where she followed him.  Poor Mr. Casaubon himself was lost among small
closets and winding stairs, and in an agitated dimness about the
Cabeiri, or in an exposure of other mythologists' ill-considered
parallels, easily lost sight of any purpose which had prompted him to
these labors.  With his taper stuck before him he forgot the absence of
windows, and in bitter manuscript remarks on other men's notions about
the solar deities, he had become indifferent to the sunlight.

These characteristics, fixed and unchangeable as bone in Mr. Casaubon,
might have remained longer unfelt by Dorothea if she had been
encouraged to pour forth her girlish and womanly feeling--if he would
have held her hands between his and listened with the delight of
tenderness and understanding to all the little histories which made up
her experience, and would have given her the same sort of intimacy in
return, so that the past life of each could be included in their mutual
knowledge and affection--or if she could have fed her affection with
those childlike caresses which are the bent of every sweet woman, who
has begun by showering kisses on the hard pate of her bald doll,
creating a happy soul within that woodenness from the wealth of her own
love.  That was Dorothea's bent.  With all her yearning to know what
was afar from her and to be widely benignant, she had ardor enough for
what was near, to have kissed Mr. Casaubon's coat-sleeve, or to have
caressed his shoe-latchet, if he would have made any other sign of
acceptance than pronouncing her, with his unfailing propriety, to be of
a most affectionate and truly feminine nature, indicating at the same
time by politely reaching a chair for her that he regarded these
manifestations as rather crude and startling.  Having made his clerical
toilet with due care in the morning, he was prepared only for those
amenities of life which were suited to the well-adjusted stiff cravat
of the period, and to a mind weighted with unpublished matter.

And by a sad contradiction Dorothea's ideas and resolves seemed like
melting ice floating and lost in the warm flood of which they had been
but another form.  She was humiliated to find herself a mere victim of
feeling, as if she could know nothing except through that medium: all
her strength was scattered in fits of agitation, of struggle, of
despondency, and then again in visions of more complete renunciation,
transforming all hard conditions into duty.  Poor Dorothea! she was
certainly troublesome--to herself chiefly; but this morning for the
first time she had been troublesome to Mr. Casaubon.

She had begun, while they were taking coffee, with a determination to
shake off what she inwardly called her selfishness, and turned a face
all cheerful attention to her husband when he said, "My dear Dorothea,
we must now think of all that is yet left undone, as a preliminary to
our departure.  I would fain have returned home earlier that we might
have been at Lowick for the Christmas; but my inquiries here have been
protracted beyond their anticipated period.  I trust, however, that the
time here has not been passed unpleasantly to you.  Among the sights of
Europe, that of Rome has ever been held one of the most striking and in
some respects edifying.  I well remember that I considered it an epoch
in my life when I visited it for the first time; after the fall of
Napoleon, an event which opened the Continent to travellers.  Indeed I
think it is one among several cities to which an extreme hyperbole has
been applied--'See Rome and die:' but in your case I would propose an
emendation and say, See Rome as a bride, and live henceforth as a happy
wife."

Mr. Casaubon pronounced this little speech with the most conscientious
intention, blinking a little and swaying his head up and down, and
concluding with a smile.  He had not found marriage a rapturous state,
but he had no idea of being anything else than an irreproachable
husband, who would make a charming young woman as happy as she deserved
to be.

"I hope you are thoroughly satisfied with our stay--I mean, with the
result so far as your studies are concerned," said Dorothea, trying to
keep her mind fixed on what most affected her husband.

"Yes," said Mr. Casaubon, with that peculiar pitch of voice which makes
the word half a negative.  "I have been led farther than I had
foreseen, and various subjects for annotation have presented themselves
which, though I have no direct need of them, I could not pretermit.
The task, notwithstanding the assistance of my amanuensis, has been a
somewhat laborious one, but your society has happily prevented me from
that too continuous prosecution of thought beyond the hours of study
which has been the snare of my solitary life."

"I am very glad that my presence has made any difference to you," said
Dorothea, who had a vivid memory of evenings in which she had supposed
that Mr. Casaubon's mind had gone too deep during the day to be able to
get to the surface again.  I fear there was a little temper in her
reply.  "I hope when we get to Lowick, I shall be more useful to you,
and be able to enter a little more into what interests you."

"Doubtless, my dear," said Mr. Casaubon, with a slight bow.  "The notes
I have here made will want sifting, and you can, if you please, extract
them under my direction."

"And all your notes," said Dorothea, whose heart had already burned
within her on this subject, so that now she could not help speaking
with her tongue.  "All those rows of volumes--will you not now do what
you used to speak of?--will you not make up your mind what part of them
you will use, and begin to write the book which will make your vast
knowledge useful to the world?  I will write to your dictation, or I
will copy and extract what you tell me: I can be of no other use."
Dorothea, in a most unaccountable, darkly feminine manner, ended with a
slight sob and eyes full of tears.

The excessive feeling manifested would alone have been highly
disturbing to Mr. Casaubon, but there were other reasons why Dorothea's
words were among the most cutting and irritating to him that she could
have been impelled to use.  She was as blind to his inward troubles as
he to hers: she had not yet learned those hidden conflicts in her
husband which claim our pity.  She had not yet listened patiently to
his heartbeats, but only felt that her own was beating violently.  In
Mr. Casaubon's ear, Dorothea's voice gave loud emphatic iteration to
those muffled suggestions of consciousness which it was possible to
explain as mere fancy, the illusion of exaggerated sensitiveness:
always when such suggestions are unmistakably repeated from without,
they are resisted as cruel and unjust.  We are angered even by the full
acceptance of our humiliating confessions--how much more by hearing in
hard distinct syllables from the lips of a near observer, those
confused murmurs which we try to call morbid, and strive against as if
they were the oncoming of numbness!  And this cruel outward accuser was
there in the shape of a wife--nay, of a young bride, who, instead of
observing his abundant pen-scratches and amplitude of paper with the
uncritical awe of an elegant-minded canary-bird, seemed to present
herself as a spy watching everything with a malign power of inference.
Here, towards this particular point of the compass, Mr. Casaubon had a
sensitiveness to match Dorothea's, and an equal quickness to imagine
more than the fact.  He had formerly observed with approbation her
capacity for worshipping the right object; he now foresaw with sudden
terror that this capacity might be replaced by presumption, this
worship by the most exasperating of all criticism,--that which sees
vaguely a great many fine ends, and has not the least notion what it
costs to reach them.

For the first time since Dorothea had known him, Mr. Casaubon's face
had a quick angry flush upon it.

"My love," he said, with irritation reined in by propriety, "you may
rely upon me for knowing the times and the seasons, adapted to the
different stages of a work which is not to be measured by the facile
conjectures of ignorant onlookers.  It had been easy for me to gain a
temporary effect by a mirage of baseless opinion; but it is ever the
trial of the scrupulous explorer to be saluted with the impatient scorn
of chatterers who attempt only the smallest achievements, being indeed
equipped for no other.  And it were well if all such could be
admonished to discriminate judgments of which the true subject-matter
lies entirely beyond their reach, from those of which the elements may
be compassed by a narrow and superficial survey."

This speech was delivered with an energy and readiness quite unusual
with Mr. Casaubon.  It was not indeed entirely an improvisation, but
had taken shape in inward colloquy, and rushed out like the round
grains from a fruit when sudden heat cracks it.  Dorothea was not only
his wife: she was a personification of that shallow world which
surrounds the appreciated or desponding author.

Dorothea was indignant in her turn.  Had she not been repressing
everything in herself except the desire to enter into some fellowship
with her husband's chief interests?

"My judgment _was_ a very superficial one--such as I am capable of
forming," she answered, with a prompt resentment, that needed no
rehearsal.  "You showed me the rows of notebooks--you have often spoken
of them--you have often said that they wanted digesting.  But I never
heard you speak of the writing that is to be published.  Those were
very simple facts, and my judgment went no farther.  I only begged you
to let me be of some good to you."

Dorothea rose to leave the table and Mr. Casaubon made no reply, taking
up a letter which lay beside him as if to reperuse it.  Both were
shocked at their mutual situation--that each should have betrayed anger
towards the other.  If they had been at home, settled at Lowick in
ordinary life among their neighbors, the clash would have been less
embarrassing: but on a wedding journey, the express object of which is
to isolate two people on the ground that they are all the world to each
other, the sense of disagreement is, to say the least, confounding and
stultifying.  To have changed your longitude extensively and placed
yourselves in a moral solitude in order to have small explosions, to
find conversation difficult and to hand a glass of water without
looking, can hardly be regarded as satisfactory fulfilment even to the
toughest minds.  To Dorothea's inexperienced sensitiveness, it seemed
like a catastrophe, changing all prospects; and to Mr. Casaubon it was
a new pain, he never having been on a wedding journey before, or found
himself in that close union which was more of a subjection than he had
been able to imagine, since this charming young bride not only obliged
him to much consideration on her behalf (which he had sedulously
given), but turned out to be capable of agitating him cruelly just
where he most needed soothing.  Instead of getting a soft fence against
the cold, shadowy, unapplausive audience of his life, had he only given
it a more substantial presence?

Neither of them felt it possible to speak again at present.  To have
reversed a previous arrangement and declined to go out would have been
a show of persistent anger which Dorothea's conscience shrank from,
seeing that she already began to feel herself guilty.  However just her
indignation might be, her ideal was not to claim justice, but to give
tenderness.  So when the carriage came to the door, she drove with Mr.
Casaubon to the Vatican, walked with him through the stony avenue of
inscriptions, and when she parted with him at the entrance to the
Library, went on through the Museum out of mere listlessness as to what
was around her.  She had not spirit to turn round and say that she
would drive anywhere.  It was when Mr. Casaubon was quitting her that
Naumann had first seen her, and he had entered the long gallery of
sculpture at the same time with her; but here Naumann had to await
Ladislaw with whom he was to settle a bet of champagne about an
enigmatical mediaeval-looking figure there.  After they had examined
the figure, and had walked on finishing their dispute, they had parted,
Ladislaw lingering behind while Naumann had gone into the Hall of
Statues where he again saw Dorothea, and saw her in that brooding
abstraction which made her pose remarkable.  She did not really see the
streak of sunlight on the floor more than she saw the statues: she was
inwardly seeing the light of years to come in her own home and over the
English fields and elms and hedge-bordered highroads; and feeling that
the way in which they might be filled with joyful devotedness was not
so clear to her as it had been.  But in Dorothea's mind there was a
current into which all thought and feeling were apt sooner or later to
flow--the reaching forward of the whole consciousness towards the
fullest truth, the least partial good.  There was clearly something
better than anger and despondency.



CHAPTER XXI.

    "Hire facounde eke full womanly and plain,
     No contrefeted termes had she
     To semen wise."
                        --CHAUCER.


It was in that way Dorothea came to be sobbing as soon as she was
securely alone.  But she was presently roused by a knock at the door,
which made her hastily dry her eyes before saying, "Come in." Tantripp
had brought a card, and said that there was a gentleman waiting in the
lobby.  The courier had told him that only Mrs. Casaubon was at home,
but he said he was a relation of Mr. Casaubon's: would she see him?

"Yes," said Dorothea, without pause; "show him into the salon." Her
chief impressions about young Ladislaw were that when she had seen him
at Lowick she had been made aware of Mr. Casaubon's generosity towards
him, and also that she had been interested in his own hesitation about
his career.  She was alive to anything that gave her an opportunity for
active sympathy, and at this moment it seemed as if the visit had come
to shake her out of her self-absorbed discontent--to remind her of her
husband's goodness, and make her feel that she had now the right to be
his helpmate in all kind deeds.  She waited a minute or two, but when
she passed into the next room there were just signs enough that she had
been crying to make her open face look more youthful and appealing than
usual.  She met Ladislaw with that exquisite smile of good-will which
is unmixed with vanity, and held out her hand to him.  He was the elder
by several years, but at that moment he looked much the younger, for
his transparent complexion flushed suddenly, and he spoke with a
shyness extremely unlike the ready indifference of his manner with his
male companion, while Dorothea became all the calmer with a wondering
desire to put him at ease.

"I was not aware that you and Mr. Casaubon were in Rome, until this
morning, when I saw you in the Vatican Museum," he said.  "I knew you
at once--but--I mean, that I concluded Mr. Casaubon's address would be
found at the Poste Restante, and I was anxious to pay my respects to
him and you as early as possible."

"Pray sit down.  He is not here now, but he will be glad to hear of
you, I am sure," said Dorothea, seating herself unthinkingly between
the fire and the light of the tall window, and pointing to a chair
opposite, with the quietude of a benignant matron.  The signs of
girlish sorrow in her face were only the more striking.  "Mr. Casaubon
is much engaged; but you will leave your address--will you not?--and
he will write to you."

"You are very good," said Ladislaw, beginning to lose his diffidence in
the interest with which he was observing the signs of weeping which had
altered her face.  "My address is on my card.  But if you will allow me
I will call again to-morrow at an hour when Mr. Casaubon is likely to
be at home."

"He goes to read in the Library of the Vatican every day, and you can
hardly see him except by an appointment.  Especially now.  We are about
to leave Rome, and he is very busy.  He is usually away almost from
breakfast till dinner.  But I am sure he will wish you to dine with us."

Will Ladislaw was struck mute for a few moments.  He had never been
fond of Mr. Casaubon, and if it had not been for the sense of
obligation, would have laughed at him as a Bat of erudition.  But the
idea of this dried-up pedant, this elaborator of small explanations
about as important as the surplus stock of false antiquities kept in a
vendor's back chamber, having first got this adorable young creature to
marry him, and then passing his honeymoon away from her, groping after
his mouldy futilities (Will was given to hyperbole)--this sudden
picture stirred him with a sort of comic disgust: he was divided
between the impulse to laugh aloud and the equally unseasonable impulse
to burst into scornful invective.

For an instant he felt that the struggle, was causing a queer
contortion of his mobile features, but with a good effort he resolved
it into nothing more offensive than a merry smile.

Dorothea wondered; but the smile was irresistible, and shone back from
her face too.  Will Ladislaw's smile was delightful, unless you were
angry with him beforehand: it was a gush of inward light illuminating
the transparent skin as well as the eyes, and playing about every curve
and line as if some Ariel were touching them with a new charm, and
banishing forever the traces of moodiness.  The reflection of that
smile could not but have a little merriment in it too, even under dark
eyelashes still moist, as Dorothea said inquiringly, "Something amuses
you?"

"Yes," said Will, quick in finding resources.  "I am thinking of the
sort of figure I cut the first time I saw you, when you annihilated my
poor sketch with your criticism."

"My criticism?" said Dorothea, wondering still more.  "Surely not.  I
always feel particularly ignorant about painting."

"I suspected you of knowing so much, that you knew how to say just what
was most cutting.  You said--I dare say you don't remember it as I
do--that the relation of my sketch to nature was quite hidden from you.
At least, you implied that."  Will could laugh now as well as smile.

"That was really my ignorance," said Dorothea, admiring
Will's good-humor. "I must have said so only because I never could see
any beauty in the pictures which my uncle told me all judges thought
very fine.  And I have gone about with just the same ignorance in Rome.
There are comparatively few paintings that I can really enjoy.  At
first when I enter a room where the walls are covered with frescos, or
with rare pictures, I feel a kind of awe--like a child present at great
ceremonies where there are grand robes and processions; I feel myself
in the presence of some higher life than my own.  But when I begin to
examine the pictures one by one the life goes out of them, or else is
something violent and strange to me.  It must be my own dulness.  I am
seeing so much all at once, and not understanding half of it.  That
always makes one feel stupid.  It is painful to be told that anything
is very fine and not be able to feel that it is fine--something like
being blind, while people talk of the sky."

"Oh, there is a great deal in the feeling for art which must be
acquired," said Will.  (It was impossible now to doubt the directness
of Dorothea's confession.) "Art is an old language with a great many
artificial affected styles, and sometimes the chief pleasure one gets
out of knowing them is the mere sense of knowing.  I enjoy the art of
all sorts here immensely; but I suppose if I could pick my enjoyment to
pieces I should find it made up of many different threads.  There is
something in daubing a little one's self, and having an idea of the
process."

"You mean perhaps to be a painter?" said Dorothea, with a new direction
of interest.  "You mean to make painting your profession?  Mr. Casaubon
will like to hear that you have chosen a profession."

"No, oh no," said Will, with some coldness.  "I have quite made up my
mind against it.  It is too one-sided a life.  I have been seeing a
great deal of the German artists here: I travelled from Frankfort with
one of them.  Some are fine, even brilliant fellows--but I should not
like to get into their way of looking at the world entirely from the
studio point of view."

"That I can understand," said Dorothea, cordially.  "And in Rome it
seems as if there were so many things which are more wanted in the
world than pictures.  But if you have a genius for painting, would it
not be right to take that as a guide?  Perhaps you might do better
things than these--or different, so that there might not be so many
pictures almost all alike in the same place."

There was no mistaking this simplicity, and Will was won by it into
frankness.  "A man must have a very rare genius to make changes of that
sort.  I am afraid mine would not carry me even to the pitch of doing
well what has been done already, at least not so well as to make it
worth while.  And I should never succeed in anything by dint of
drudgery.  If things don't come easily to me I never get them."

"I have heard Mr. Casaubon say that he regrets your want of patience,"
said Dorothea, gently.  She was rather shocked at this mode of taking
all life as a holiday.

"Yes, I know Mr. Casaubon's opinion.  He and I differ."

The slight streak of contempt in this hasty reply offended Dorothea.
She was all the more susceptible about Mr. Casaubon because of her
morning's trouble.

"Certainly you differ," she said, rather proudly.  "I did not think of
comparing you: such power of persevering devoted labor as Mr.
Casaubon's is not common."

Will saw that she was offended, but this only gave an additional
impulse to the new irritation of his latent dislike towards Mr.
Casaubon.  It was too intolerable that Dorothea should be worshipping
this husband: such weakness in a woman is pleasant to no man but the
husband in question.  Mortals are easily tempted to pinch the life out
of their neighbor's buzzing glory, and think that such killing is no
murder.

"No, indeed," he answered, promptly.  "And therefore it is a pity that
it should be thrown away, as so much English scholarship is, for want
of knowing what is being done by the rest of the world.  If Mr.
Casaubon read German he would save himself a great deal of trouble."

"I do not understand you," said Dorothea, startled and anxious.

"I merely mean," said Will, in an offhand way, "that the Germans have
taken the lead in historical inquiries, and they laugh at results which
are got by groping about in woods with a pocket-compass while they have
made good roads.  When I was with Mr. Casaubon I saw that he deafened
himself in that direction: it was almost against his will that he read
a Latin treatise written by a German.  I was very sorry."

Will only thought of giving a good pinch that would annihilate that
vaunted laboriousness, and was unable to imagine the mode in which
Dorothea would be wounded.  Young Mr. Ladislaw was not at all deep
himself in German writers; but very little achievement is required in
order to pity another man's shortcomings.

Poor Dorothea felt a pang at the thought that the labor of her
husband's life might be void, which left her no energy to spare for the
question whether this young relative who was so much obliged to him
ought not to have repressed his observation.  She did not even speak,
but sat looking at her hands, absorbed in the piteousness of that
thought.

Will, however, having given that annihilating pinch, was rather
ashamed, imagining from Dorothea's silence that he had offended her
still more; and having also a conscience about plucking the
tail-feathers from a benefactor.

"I regretted it especially," he resumed, taking the usual course from
detraction to insincere eulogy, "because of my gratitude and respect
towards my cousin.  It would not signify so much in a man whose talents
and character were less distinguished."

Dorothea raised her eyes, brighter than usual with excited feeling, and
said in her saddest recitative, "How I wish I had learned German when I
was at Lausanne!  There were plenty of German teachers.  But now I can
be of no use."

There was a new light, but still a mysterious light, for Will in
Dorothea's last words.  The question how she had come to accept Mr.
Casaubon--which he had dismissed when he first saw her by saying that
she must be disagreeable in spite of appearances--was not now to be
answered on any such short and easy method.  Whatever else she might
be, she was not disagreeable.  She was not coldly clever and indirectly
satirical, but adorably simple and full of feeling.  She was an angel
beguiled.  It would be a unique delight to wait and watch for the
melodious fragments in which her heart and soul came forth so directly
and ingenuously.  The Aeolian harp again came into his mind.

She must have made some original romance for herself in this marriage.
And if Mr. Casaubon had been a dragon who had carried her off to his
lair with his talons simply and without legal forms, it would have been
an unavoidable feat of heroism to release her and fall at her feet.
But he was something more unmanageable than a dragon: he was a
benefactor with collective society at his back, and he was at that
moment entering the room in all the unimpeachable correctness of his
demeanor, while Dorothea was looking animated with a newly roused alarm
and regret, and Will was looking animated with his admiring speculation
about her feelings.

Mr. Casaubon felt a surprise which was quite unmixed with pleasure, but
he did not swerve from his usual politeness of greeting, when Will rose
and explained his presence.  Mr. Casaubon was less happy than usual,
and this perhaps made him look all the dimmer and more faded; else, the
effect might easily have been produced by the contrast of his young
cousin's appearance.  The first impression on seeing Will was one of
sunny brightness, which added to the uncertainty of his changing
expression.  Surely, his very features changed their form, his jaw
looked sometimes large and sometimes small; and the little ripple in
his nose was a preparation for metamorphosis.  When he turned his head
quickly his hair seemed to shake out light, and some persons thought
they saw decided genius in this coruscation.  Mr. Casaubon, on the
contrary, stood rayless.

As Dorothea's eyes were turned anxiously on her husband she was perhaps
not insensible to the contrast, but it was only mingled with other
causes in making her more conscious of that new alarm on his behalf
which was the first stirring of a pitying tenderness fed by the
realities of his lot and not by her own dreams.  Yet it was a source of
greater freedom to her that Will was there; his young equality was
agreeable, and also perhaps his openness to conviction.  She felt an
immense need of some one to speak to, and she had never before seen any
one who seemed so quick and pliable, so likely to understand everything.

Mr. Casaubon gravely hoped that Will was passing his time profitably as
well as pleasantly in Rome--had thought his intention was to remain in
South Germany--but begged him to come and dine to-morrow, when he could
converse more at large: at present he was somewhat weary.  Ladislaw
understood, and accepting the invitation immediately took his leave.

Dorothea's eyes followed her husband anxiously, while he sank down
wearily at the end of a sofa, and resting his elbow supported his head
and looked on the floor.  A little flushed, and with bright eyes, she
seated herself beside him, and said--

"Forgive me for speaking so hastily to you this morning.  I was wrong.
I fear I hurt you and made the day more burdensome."

"I am glad that you feel that, my dear," said Mr. Casaubon.  He spoke
quietly and bowed his head a little, but there was still an uneasy
feeling in his eyes as he looked at her.

"But you do forgive me?" said Dorothea, with a quick sob.  In her need
for some manifestation of feeling she was ready to exaggerate her own
fault.  Would not love see returning penitence afar off, and fall on
its neck and kiss it?

"My dear Dorothea--'who with repentance is not satisfied, is not of
heaven nor earth:'--you do not think me worthy to be banished by that
severe sentence," said Mr. Casaubon, exerting himself to make a strong
statement, and also to smile faintly.

Dorothea was silent, but a tear which had come up with the sob would
insist on falling.

"You are excited, my dear. And I also am feeling some unpleasant
consequences of too much mental disturbance," said Mr. Casaubon.  In
fact, he had it in his thought to tell her that she ought not to have
received young Ladislaw in his absence: but he abstained, partly from
the sense that it would be ungracious to bring a new complaint in the
moment of her penitent acknowledgment, partly because he wanted to
avoid further agitation of himself by speech, and partly because he was
too proud to betray that jealousy of disposition which was not so
exhausted on his scholarly compeers that there was none to spare in
other directions.  There is a sort of jealousy which needs very little
fire: it is hardly a passion, but a blight bred in the cloudy, damp
despondency of uneasy egoism.

"I think it is time for us to dress," he added, looking at his watch.
They both rose, and there was never any further allusion between them
to what had passed on this day.

But Dorothea remembered it to the last with the vividness with which we
all remember epochs in our experience when some dear expectation dies,
or some new motive is born.  Today she had begun to see that she had
been under a wild illusion in expecting a response to her feeling from
Mr. Casaubon, and she had felt the waking of a presentiment that there
might be a sad consciousness in his life which made as great a need on
his side as on her own.

We are all of us born in moral stupidity, taking the world as an udder
to feed our supreme selves: Dorothea had early begun to emerge from
that stupidity, but yet it had been easier to her to imagine how she
would devote herself to Mr. Casaubon, and become wise and strong in his
strength and wisdom, than to conceive with that distinctness which is
no longer reflection but feeling--an idea wrought back to the
directness of sense, like the solidity of objects--that he had an
equivalent centre of self, whence the lights and shadows must always
fall with a certain difference.



CHAPTER XXII.

    "Nous causames longtemps; elle etait simple et bonne.
     Ne sachant pas le mal, elle faisait le bien;
     Des richesses du coeur elle me fit l'aumone,
     Et tout en ecoutant comme le coeur se donne,
     Sans oser y penser je lui donnai le mien;
     Elle emporta ma vie, et n'en sut jamais rien."
                                         --ALFRED DE MUSSET.


Will Ladislaw was delightfully agreeable at dinner the next day, and
gave no opportunity for Mr. Casaubon to show disapprobation.  On the
contrary it seemed to Dorothea that Will had a happier way of drawing
her husband into conversation and of deferentially listening to him
than she had ever observed in any one before.  To be sure, the
listeners about Tipton were not highly gifted!  Will talked a good deal
himself, but what he said was thrown in with such rapidity, and with
such an unimportant air of saying something by the way, that it seemed
a gay little chime after the great bell.  If Will was not always
perfect, this was certainly one of his good days.  He described touches
of incident among the poor people in Rome, only to be seen by one who
could move about freely; he found himself in agreement with Mr.
Casaubon as to the unsound opinions of Middleton concerning the
relations of Judaism and Catholicism; and passed easily to a
half-enthusiastic half-playful picture of the enjoyment he got out of
the very miscellaneousness of Rome, which made the mind flexible with
constant comparison, and saved you from seeing the world's ages as a
set of box-like partitions without vital connection.  Mr. Casaubon's
studies, Will observed, had always been of too broad a kind for that,
and he had perhaps never felt any such sudden effect, but for himself
he confessed that Rome had given him quite a new sense of history as a
whole: the fragments stimulated his imagination and made him
constructive.  Then occasionally, but not too often, he appealed to
Dorothea, and discussed what she said, as if her sentiment were an item
to be considered in the final judgment even of the Madonna di Foligno
or the Laocoon.  A sense of contributing to form the world's opinion
makes conversation particularly cheerful; and Mr. Casaubon too was not
without his pride in his young wife, who spoke better than most women,
as indeed he had perceived in choosing her.

Since things were going on so pleasantly, Mr. Casaubon's statement that
his labors in the Library would be suspended for a couple of days, and
that after a brief renewal he should have no further reason for staying
in Rome, encouraged Will to urge that Mrs. Casaubon should not go away
without seeing a studio or two.  Would not Mr. Casaubon take her?  That
sort of thing ought not to be missed: it was quite special: it was a
form of life that grew like a small fresh vegetation with its
population of insects on huge fossils.  Will would be happy to conduct
them--not to anything wearisome, only to a few examples.

Mr. Casaubon, seeing Dorothea look earnestly towards him, could not but
ask her if she would be interested in such visits: he was now at her
service during the whole day; and it was agreed that Will should come
on the morrow and drive with them.

Will could not omit Thorwaldsen, a living celebrity about whom even Mr.
Casaubon inquired, but before the day was far advanced he led the way
to the studio of his friend Adolf Naumann, whom he mentioned as one of
the chief renovators of Christian art, one of those who had not only
revived but expanded that grand conception of supreme events as
mysteries at which the successive ages were spectators, and in relation
to which the great souls of all periods became as it were
contemporaries.  Will added that he had made himself Naumann's pupil
for the nonce.

"I have been making some oil-sketches under him," said Will.  "I hate
copying.  I must put something of my own in.  Naumann has been painting
the Saints drawing the Car of the Church, and I have been making a
sketch of Marlowe's Tamburlaine Driving the Conquered Kings in his
Chariot.  I am not so ecclesiastical as Naumann, and I sometimes twit
him with his excess of meaning.  But this time I mean to outdo him in
breadth of intention.  I take Tamburlaine in his chariot for the
tremendous course of the world's physical history lashing on the
harnessed dynasties.  In my opinion, that is a good mythical
interpretation."  Will here looked at Mr. Casaubon, who received this
offhand treatment of symbolism very uneasily, and bowed with a neutral
air.

"The sketch must be very grand, if it conveys so much," said Dorothea.
"I should need some explanation even of the meaning you give.  Do you
intend Tamburlaine to represent earthquakes and volcanoes?"

"Oh yes," said Will, laughing, "and migrations of races and clearings
of forests--and America and the steam-engine. Everything you can
imagine!"

"What a difficult kind of shorthand!" said Dorothea, smiling towards
her husband.  "It would require all your knowledge to be able to read
it."

Mr. Casaubon blinked furtively at Will.  He had a suspicion that he was
being laughed at.  But it was not possible to include Dorothea in the
suspicion.

They found Naumann painting industriously, but no model was present;
his pictures were advantageously arranged, and his own plain vivacious
person set off by a dove-colored blouse and a maroon velvet cap, so
that everything was as fortunate as if he had expected the beautiful
young English lady exactly at that time.

The painter in his confident English gave little dissertations on his
finished and unfinished subjects, seeming to observe Mr. Casaubon as
much as he did Dorothea.  Will burst in here and there with ardent
words of praise, marking out particular merits in his friend's work;
and Dorothea felt that she was getting quite new notions as to the
significance of Madonnas seated under inexplicable canopied thrones
with the simple country as a background, and of saints with
architectural models in their hands, or knives accidentally wedged in
their skulls.  Some things which had seemed monstrous to her were
gathering intelligibility and even a natural meaning: but all this was
apparently a branch of knowledge in which Mr. Casaubon had not
interested himself.

"I think I would rather feel that painting is beautiful than have to
read it as an enigma; but I should learn to understand these pictures
sooner than yours with the very wide meaning," said Dorothea, speaking
to Will.

"Don't speak of my painting before Naumann," said Will.  "He will tell
you, it is all pfuscherei, which is his most opprobrious word!"

"Is that true?" said Dorothea, turning her sincere eyes on Naumann, who
made a slight grimace and said--

"Oh, he does not mean it seriously with painting.  His walk must be
belles-lettres. That is wi-ide."

Naumann's pronunciation of the vowel seemed to stretch the word
satirically.  Will did not half like it, but managed to laugh: and Mr.
Casaubon, while he felt some disgust at the artist's German accent,
began to entertain a little respect for his judicious severity.

The respect was not diminished when Naumann, after drawing Will aside
for a moment and looking, first at a large canvas, then at Mr.
Casaubon, came forward again and said--

"My friend Ladislaw thinks you will pardon me, sir, if I say that a
sketch of your head would be invaluable to me for the St. Thomas
Aquinas in my picture there.  It is too much to ask; but I so seldom
see just what I want--the idealistic in the real."

"You astonish me greatly, sir," said Mr. Casaubon, his looks improved
with a glow of delight; "but if my poor physiognomy, which I have been
accustomed to regard as of the commonest order, can be of any use to
you in furnishing some traits for the angelical doctor, I shall feel
honored.  That is to say, if the operation will not be a lengthy one;
and if Mrs. Casaubon will not object to the delay."

As for Dorothea, nothing could have pleased her more, unless it had
been a miraculous voice pronouncing Mr. Casaubon the wisest and
worthiest among the sons of men.  In that case her tottering faith
would have become firm again.

Naumann's apparatus was at hand in wonderful completeness, and the
sketch went on at once as well as the conversation.  Dorothea sat down
and subsided into calm silence, feeling happier than she had done for a
long while before.  Every one about her seemed good, and she said to
herself that Rome, if she had only been less ignorant, would have been
full of beauty: its sadness would have been winged with hope.  No nature
could be less suspicious than hers: when she was a child she believed
in the gratitude of wasps and the honorable susceptibility of sparrows,
and was proportionately indignant when their baseness was made manifest.

The adroit artist was asking Mr. Casaubon questions about English
polities, which brought long answers, and, Will meanwhile had perched
himself on some steps in the background overlooking all.

Presently Naumann said--"Now if I could lay this by for half an hour
and take it up again--come and look, Ladislaw--I think it is perfect so
far."

Will vented those adjuring interjections which imply that admiration is
too strong for syntax; and Naumann said in a tone of piteous regret--

"Ah--now--if I could but have had more--but you have other
engagements--I could not ask it--or even to come again to-morrow."

"Oh, let us stay!" said Dorothea.  "We have nothing to do to-day except
go about, have we?" she added, looking entreatingly at Mr. Casaubon.
"It would be a pity not to make the head as good as possible."

"I am at your service, sir, in the matter," said Mr. Casaubon, with
polite condescension.  "Having given up the interior of my head to
idleness, it is as well that the exterior should work in this way."

"You are unspeakably good--now I am happy!" said Naumann, and then went
on in German to Will, pointing here and there to the sketch as if he
were considering that.  Putting it aside for a moment, he looked round
vaguely, as if seeking some occupation for his visitors, and afterwards
turning to Mr. Casaubon, said--

"Perhaps the beautiful bride, the gracious lady, would not be unwilling
to let me fill up the time by trying to make a slight sketch of
her--not, of course, as you see, for that picture--only as a single
study."

Mr. Casaubon, bowing, doubted not that Mrs. Casaubon would oblige him,
and Dorothea said, at once, "Where shall I put myself?"

Naumann was all apologies in asking her to stand, and allow him to
adjust her attitude, to which she submitted without any of the affected
airs and laughs frequently thought necessary on such occasions, when
the painter said, "It is as Santa Clara that I want you to
stand--leaning so, with your cheek against your hand--so--looking at
that stool, please, so!"

Will was divided between the inclination to fall at the Saint's feet
and kiss her robe, and the temptation to knock Naumann down while he
was adjusting her arm.  All this was impudence and desecration, and he
repented that he had brought her.

The artist was diligent, and Will recovering himself moved about and
occupied Mr. Casaubon as ingeniously as he could; but he did not in the
end prevent the time from seeming long to that gentleman, as was clear
from his expressing a fear that Mrs. Casaubon would be tired.  Naumann
took the hint and said--

"Now, sir, if you can oblige me again; I will release the lady-wife."

So Mr. Casaubon's patience held out further, and when after all it
turned out that the head of Saint Thomas Aquinas would be more perfect
if another sitting could be had, it was granted for the morrow.  On the
morrow Santa Clara too was retouched more than once.  The result of all
was so far from displeasing to Mr. Casaubon, that he arranged for the
purchase of the picture in which Saint Thomas Aquinas sat among the
doctors of the Church in a disputation too abstract to be represented,
but listened to with more or less attention by an audience above.  The
Santa Clara, which was spoken of in the second place, Naumann declared
himself to be dissatisfied with--he could not, in conscience, engage
to make a worthy picture of it; so about the Santa Clara the
arrangement was conditional.

I will not dwell on Naumann's jokes at the expense of Mr. Casaubon that
evening, or on his dithyrambs about Dorothea's charm, in all which Will
joined, but with a difference.  No sooner did Naumann mention any
detail of Dorothea's beauty, than Will got exasperated at his
presumption: there was grossness in his choice of the most ordinary
words, and what business had he to talk of her lips?  She was not a
woman to be spoken of as other women were.  Will could not say just
what he thought, but he became irritable.  And yet, when after some
resistance he had consented to take the Casaubons to his friend's
studio, he had been allured by the gratification of his pride in being
the person who could grant Naumann such an opportunity of studying her
loveliness--or rather her divineness, for the ordinary phrases which
might apply to mere bodily prettiness were not applicable to her.
(Certainly all Tipton and its neighborhood, as well as Dorothea
herself, would have been surprised at her beauty being made so much of.
In that part of the world Miss Brooke had been only a "fine young
woman.")

"Oblige me by letting the subject drop, Naumann.  Mrs. Casaubon is not
to be talked of as if she were a model," said Will.  Naumann stared at
him.

"Schon!  I will talk of my Aquinas.  The head is not a bad type, after
all.  I dare say the great scholastic himself would have been flattered
to have his portrait asked for.  Nothing like these starchy doctors for
vanity!  It was as I thought: he cared much less for her portrait than
his own."

"He's a cursed white-blooded pedantic coxcomb," said Will, with
gnashing impetuosity.  His obligations to Mr. Casaubon were not known
to his hearer, but Will himself was thinking of them, and wishing that
he could discharge them all by a check.

Naumann gave a shrug and said, "It is good they go away soon, my dear.
They are spoiling your fine temper."

All Will's hope and contrivance were now concentrated on seeing
Dorothea when she was alone.  He only wanted her to take more emphatic
notice of him; he only wanted to be something more special in her
remembrance than he could yet believe himself likely to be.  He was
rather impatient under that open ardent good-will, which he saw was her
usual state of feeling.  The remote worship of a woman throned out of
their reach plays a great part in men's lives, but in most cases the
worshipper longs for some queenly recognition, some approving sign by
which his soul's sovereign may cheer him without descending from her
high place.  That was precisely what Will wanted.  But there were
plenty of contradictions in his imaginative demands.  It was beautiful
to see how Dorothea's eyes turned with wifely anxiety and beseeching to
Mr. Casaubon: she would have lost some of her halo if she had been
without that duteous preoccupation; and yet at the next moment the
husband's sandy absorption of such nectar was too intolerable; and
Will's longing to say damaging things about him was perhaps not the
less tormenting because he felt the strongest reasons for restraining
it.

Will had not been invited to dine the next day.  Hence he persuaded
himself that he was bound to call, and that the only eligible time was
the middle of the day, when Mr. Casaubon would not be at home.

Dorothea, who had not been made aware that her former reception of Will
had displeased her husband, had no hesitation about seeing him,
especially as he might be come to pay a farewell visit.  When he
entered she was looking at some cameos which she had been buying for
Celia.  She greeted Will as if his visit were quite a matter of course,
and said at once, having a cameo bracelet in her hand--

"I am so glad you are come.  Perhaps you understand all about cameos,
and can tell me if these are really good.  I wished to have you with us
in choosing them, but Mr. Casaubon objected: he thought there was not
time.  He will finish his work to-morrow, and we shall go away in three
days.  I have been uneasy about these cameos.  Pray sit down and look
at them."

"I am not particularly knowing, but there can be no great mistake about
these little Homeric bits: they are exquisitely neat.  And the color is
fine: it will just suit you."

"Oh, they are for my sister, who has quite a different complexion.  You
saw her with me at Lowick: she is light-haired and very pretty--at
least I think so.  We were never so long away from each other in our
lives before.  She is a great pet and never was naughty in her life.  I
found out before I came away that she wanted me to buy her some cameos,
and I should be sorry for them not to be good--after their kind."
Dorothea added the last words with a smile.

"You seem not to care about cameos," said Will, seating himself at some
distance from her, and observing her while she closed the cases.

"No, frankly, I don't think them a great object in life," said Dorothea

"I fear you are a heretic about art generally.  How is that?  I should
have expected you to be very sensitive to the beautiful everywhere."

"I suppose I am dull about many things," said Dorothea, simply.  "I
should like to make life beautiful--I mean everybody's life.  And then
all this immense expense of art, that seems somehow to lie outside life
and make it no better for the world, pains one.  It spoils my enjoyment
of anything when I am made to think that most people are shut out from
it."

"I call that the fanaticism of sympathy," said Will, impetuously.  "You
might say the same of landscape, of poetry, of all refinement.  If you
carried it out you ought to be miserable in your own goodness, and turn
evil that you might have no advantage over others.  The best piety is
to enjoy--when you can.  You are doing the most then to save the
earth's character as an agreeable planet.  And enjoyment radiates.  It
is of no use to try and take care of all the world; that is being taken
care of when you feel delight--in art or in anything else.  Would you
turn all the youth of the world into a tragic chorus, wailing and
moralizing over misery?  I suspect that you have some false belief in
the virtues of misery, and want to make your life a martyrdom."  Will
had gone further than he intended, and checked himself.  But Dorothea's
thought was not taking just the same direction as his own, and she
answered without any special emotion--

"Indeed you mistake me.  I am not a sad, melancholy creature.  I am
never unhappy long together.  I am angry and naughty--not like Celia: I
have a great outburst, and then all seems glorious again.  I cannot
help believing in glorious things in a blind sort of way.  I should be
quite willing to enjoy the art here, but there is so much that I don't
know the reason of--so much that seems to me a consecration of ugliness
rather than beauty.  The painting and sculpture may be wonderful, but
the feeling is often low and brutal, and sometimes even ridiculous.
Here and there I see what takes me at once as noble--something that I
might compare with the Alban Mountains or the sunset from the Pincian
Hill; but that makes it the greater pity that there is so little of the
best kind among all that mass of things over which men have toiled so."

"Of course there is always a great deal of poor work: the rarer things
want that soil to grow in."

"Oh dear," said Dorothea, taking up that thought into the chief current
of her anxiety; "I see it must be very difficult to do anything good.
I have often felt since I have been in Rome that most of our lives
would look much uglier and more bungling than the pictures, if they
could be put on the wall."

Dorothea parted her lips again as if she were going to say more, but
changed her mind and paused.

"You are too young--it is an anachronism for you to have such
thoughts," said Will, energetically, with a quick shake of the head
habitual to him.  "You talk as if you had never known any youth.  It is
monstrous--as if you had had a vision of Hades in your childhood, like
the boy in the legend.  You have been brought up in some of those
horrible notions that choose the sweetest women to devour--like
Minotaurs. And now you will go and be shut up in that stone prison at
Lowick: you will be buried alive.  It makes me savage to think of it!
I would rather never have seen you than think of you with such a
prospect."

Will again feared that he had gone too far; but the meaning we attach
to words depends on our feeling, and his tone of angry regret had so
much kindness in it for Dorothea's heart, which had always been giving
out ardor and had never been fed with much from the living beings
around her, that she felt a new sense of gratitude and answered with a
gentle smile--

"It is very good of you to be anxious about me.  It is because you did
not like Lowick yourself: you had set your heart on another kind of
life.  But Lowick is my chosen home."

The last sentence was spoken with an almost solemn cadence, and Will
did not know what to say, since it would not be useful for him to
embrace her slippers, and tell her that he would die for her: it was
clear that she required nothing of the sort; and they were both silent
for a moment or two, when Dorothea began again with an air of saying at
last what had been in her mind beforehand.

"I wanted to ask you again about something you said the other day.
Perhaps it was half of it your lively way of speaking: I notice that
you like to put things strongly; I myself often exaggerate when I speak
hastily."

"What was it?" said Will, observing that she spoke with a timidity
quite new in her.  "I have a hyperbolical tongue: it catches fire as it
goes.  I dare say I shall have to retract."

"I mean what you said about the necessity of knowing German--I mean,
for the subjects that Mr. Casaubon is engaged in.  I have been thinking
about it; and it seems to me that with Mr. Casaubon's learning he must
have before him the same materials as German scholars--has he not?"
Dorothea's timidity was due to an indistinct consciousness that she was
in the strange situation of consulting a third person about the
adequacy of Mr. Casaubon's learning.

"Not exactly the same materials," said Will, thinking that he would be
duly reserved.  "He is not an Orientalist, you know.  He does not
profess to have more than second-hand knowledge there."

"But there are very valuable books about antiquities which were written
a long while ago by scholars who knew nothing about these modern
things; and they are still used.  Why should Mr. Casaubon's not be
valuable, like theirs?" said Dorothea, with more remonstrant energy.
She was impelled to have the argument aloud, which she had been having
in her own mind.

"That depends on the line of study taken," said Will, also getting a
tone of rejoinder.  "The subject Mr. Casaubon has chosen is as changing
as chemistry: new discoveries are constantly making new points of view.
Who wants a system on the basis of the four elements, or a book to
refute Paracelsus?  Do you not see that it is no use now to be crawling
a little way after men of the last century--men like Bryant--and
correcting their mistakes?--living in a lumber-room and furbishing up
broken-legged theories about Chus and Mizraim?"

"How can you bear to speak so lightly?" said Dorothea, with a look
between sorrow and anger.  "If it were as you say, what could be sadder
than so much ardent labor all in vain?  I wonder it does not affect you
more painfully, if you really think that a man like Mr. Casaubon, of so
much goodness, power, and learning, should in any way fail in what has
been the labor of his best years." She was beginning to be shocked that
she had got to such a point of supposition, and indignant with Will for
having led her to it.

"You questioned me about the matter of fact, not of feeling," said
Will.  "But if you wish to punish me for the fact, I submit.  I am not
in a position to express my feeling toward Mr. Casaubon: it would be at
best a pensioner's eulogy."

"Pray excuse me," said Dorothea, coloring deeply.  "I am aware, as you
say, that I am in fault in having introduced the subject.  Indeed, I am
wrong altogether.  Failure after long perseverance is much grander than
never to have a striving good enough to be called a failure."

"I quite agree with you," said Will, determined to change the
situation--"so much so that I have made up my mind not to run that
risk of never attaining a failure.  Mr. Casaubon's generosity has
perhaps been dangerous to me, and I mean to renounce the liberty it has
given me.  I mean to go back to England shortly and work my own
way--depend on nobody else than myself."

"That is fine--I respect that feeling," said Dorothea, with returning
kindness.  "But Mr. Casaubon, I am sure, has never thought of anything
in the matter except what was most for your welfare."

"She has obstinacy and pride enough to serve instead of love, now she
has married him," said Will to himself.  Aloud he said, rising--

"I shall not see you again."

"Oh, stay till Mr. Casaubon comes," said Dorothea, earnestly.  "I am so
glad we met in Rome.  I wanted to know you."

"And I have made you angry," said Will.  "I have made you think ill of
me."

"Oh no.  My sister tells me I am always angry with people who do not
say just what I like.  But I hope I am not given to think ill of them.
In the end I am usually obliged to think ill of myself for being so
impatient."

"Still, you don't like me; I have made myself an unpleasant thought to
you."

"Not at all," said Dorothea, with the most open kindness.  "I like you
very much."

Will was not quite contented, thinking that he would apparently have
been of more importance if he had been disliked.  He said nothing, but
looked dull, not to say sulky.

"And I am quite interested to see what you will do," Dorothea went on
cheerfully.  "I believe devoutly in a natural difference of vocation.
If it were not for that belief, I suppose I should be very narrow--there
are so many things, besides painting, that I am quite ignorant
of.  You would hardly believe how little I have taken in of music and
literature, which you know so much of.  I wonder what your vocation
will turn out to be: perhaps you will be a poet?"

"That depends.  To be a poet is to have a soul so quick to discern that
no shade of quality escapes it, and so quick to feel, that discernment
is but a hand playing with finely ordered variety on the chords of
emotion--a soul in which knowledge passes instantaneously into feeling,
and feeling flashes back as a new organ of knowledge.  One may have
that condition by fits only."

"But you leave out the poems," said Dorothea.  "I think they are wanted
to complete the poet.  I understand what you mean about knowledge
passing into feeling, for that seems to be just what I experience.  But
I am sure I could never produce a poem."

"You _are_ a poem--and that is to be the best part of a poet--what
makes up the poet's consciousness in his best moods," said Will,
showing such originality as we all share with the morning and the
spring-time and other endless renewals.

"I am very glad to hear it," said Dorothea, laughing out her words in a
bird-like modulation, and looking at Will with playful gratitude in her
eyes.  "What very kind things you say to me!"

"I wish I could ever do anything that would be what you call kind--that
I could ever be of the slightest service to you. I fear I shall never
have the opportunity."  Will spoke with fervor.

"Oh yes," said Dorothea, cordially.  "It will come; and I shall
remember how well you wish me.  I quite hoped that we should be friends
when I first saw you--because of your relationship to Mr. Casaubon."
There was a certain liquid brightness in her eyes, and Will was
conscious that his own were obeying a law of nature and filling too.
The allusion to Mr. Casaubon would have spoiled all if anything at that
moment could have spoiled the subduing power, the sweet dignity, of her
noble unsuspicious inexperience.

"And there is one thing even now that you can do," said Dorothea,
rising and walking a little way under the strength of a recurring
impulse.  "Promise me that you will not again, to any one, speak of
that subject--I mean about Mr. Casaubon's writings--I mean in that
kind of way.  It was I who led to it.  It was my fault.  But promise
me."

She had returned from her brief pacing and stood opposite Will, looking
gravely at him.

"Certainly, I will promise you," said Will, reddening however.  If he
never said a cutting word about Mr. Casaubon again and left off
receiving favors from him, it would clearly be permissible to hate him
the more.  The poet must know how to hate, says Goethe; and Will was at
least ready with that accomplishment.  He said that he must go now
without waiting for Mr. Casaubon, whom he would come to take leave of
at the last moment.  Dorothea gave him her hand, and they exchanged a
simple "Good-by."

But going out of the porte cochere he met Mr. Casaubon, and that
gentleman, expressing the best wishes for his cousin, politely waived
the pleasure of any further leave-taking on the morrow, which would be
sufficiently crowded with the preparations for departure.

"I have something to tell you about our cousin Mr. Ladislaw, which I
think will heighten your opinion of him," said Dorothea to her husband
in the coarse of the evening.  She had mentioned immediately on his
entering that Will had just gone away, and would come again, but Mr.
Casaubon had said, "I met him outside, and we made our final adieux, I
believe," saying this with the air and tone by which we imply that any
subject, whether private or public, does not interest us enough to wish
for a further remark upon it.  So Dorothea had waited.

"What is that, my love?" said Mr Casaubon (he always said "my love"
when his manner was the coldest).

"He has made up his mind to leave off wandering at once, and to give up
his dependence on your generosity.  He means soon to go back to
England, and work his own way.  I thought you would consider that a
good sign," said Dorothea, with an appealing look into her husband's
neutral face.

"Did he mention the precise order of occupation to which he would
addict himself?"

"No. But he said that he felt the danger which lay for him in your
generosity.  Of course he will write to you about it.  Do you not think
better of him for his resolve?"

"I shall await his communication on the subject," said Mr. Casaubon.

"I told him I was sure that the thing you considered in all you did for
him was his own welfare.  I remembered your goodness in what you said
about him when I first saw him at Lowick," said Dorothea, putting her
hand on her husband's.

"I had a duty towards him," said Mr. Casaubon, laying his other hand on
Dorothea's in conscientious acceptance of her caress, but with a glance
which he could not hinder from being uneasy.  "The young man, I
confess, is not otherwise an object of interest to me, nor need we, I
think, discuss his future course, which it is not ours to determine
beyond the limits which I have sufficiently indicated." Dorothea did
not mention Will again.





BOOK III.





WAITING FOR DEATH.



CHAPTER XXIII.

    "Your horses of the Sun," he said,
    "And first-rate whip Apollo!
     Whate'er they be, I'll eat my head,
     But I will beat them hollow."


Fred Vincy, we have seen, had a debt on his mind, and though no such
immaterial burthen could depress that buoyant-hearted young gentleman
for many hours together, there were circumstances connected with this
debt which made the thought of it unusually importunate.  The creditor
was Mr. Bambridge a horse-dealer of the neighborhood, whose company was
much sought in Middlemarch by young men understood to be "addicted to
pleasure."  During the vacations Fred had naturally required more
amusements than he had ready money for, and Mr. Bambridge had been
accommodating enough not only to trust him for the hire of horses and
the accidental expense of ruining a fine hunter, but also to make a
small advance by which he might be able to meet some losses at
billiards.  The total debt was a hundred and sixty pounds.  Bambridge
was in no alarm about his money, being sure that young Vincy had
backers; but he had required something to show for it, and Fred had at
first given a bill with his own signature.  Three months later he had
renewed this bill with the signature of Caleb Garth.  On both occasions
Fred had felt confident that he should meet the bill himself, having
ample funds at disposal in his own hopefulness.  You will hardly demand
that his confidence should have a basis in external facts; such
confidence, we know, is something less coarse and materialistic: it is
a comfortable disposition leading us to expect that the wisdom of
providence or the folly of our friends, the mysteries of luck or the
still greater mystery of our high individual value in the universe,
will bring about agreeable issues, such as are consistent with our good
taste in costume, and our general preference for the best style of
thing.  Fred felt sure that he should have a present from his uncle,
that he should have a run of luck, that by dint of "swapping" he should
gradually metamorphose a horse worth forty pounds into a horse that
would fetch a hundred at any moment--"judgment" being always equivalent
to an unspecified sum in hard cash.  And in any case, even supposing
negations which only a morbid distrust could imagine, Fred had always
(at that time) his father's pocket as a last resource, so that his
assets of hopefulness had a sort of gorgeous superfluity about them.
Of what might be the capacity of his father's pocket, Fred had only a
vague notion: was not trade elastic?  And would not the deficiencies of
one year be made up for by the surplus of another?  The Vincys lived in
an easy profuse way, not with any new ostentation, but according to the
family habits and traditions, so that the children had no standard of
economy, and the elder ones retained some of their infantine notion
that their father might pay for anything if he would.  Mr. Vincy
himself had expensive Middlemarch habits--spent money on coursing, on
his cellar, and on dinner-giving, while mamma had those running
accounts with tradespeople, which give a cheerful sense of getting
everything one wants without any question of payment.  But it was in
the nature of fathers, Fred knew, to bully one about expenses: there
was always a little storm over his extravagance if he had to disclose a
debt, and Fred disliked bad weather within doors.  He was too filial to
be disrespectful to his father, and he bore the thunder with the
certainty that it was transient; but in the mean time it was
disagreeable to see his mother cry, and also to be obliged to look
sulky instead of having fun; for Fred was so good-tempered that if he
looked glum under scolding, it was chiefly for propriety's sake.  The
easier course plainly, was to renew the bill with a friend's signature.
Why not? With the superfluous securities of hope at his command, there
was no reason why he should not have increased other people's
liabilities to any extent, but for the fact that men whose names were
good for anything were usually pessimists, indisposed to believe that
the universal order of things would necessarily be agreeable to an
agreeable young gentleman.

With a favor to ask we review our list of friends, do justice to their
more amiable qualities, forgive their little offenses, and concerning
each in turn, try to arrive at the conclusion that he will be eager to
oblige us, our own eagerness to be obliged being as communicable as
other warmth.  Still there is always a certain number who are dismissed
as but moderately eager until the others have refused; and it happened
that Fred checked off all his friends but one, on the ground that
applying to them would be disagreeable; being implicitly convinced that
he at least (whatever might be maintained about mankind generally) had
a right to be free from anything disagreeable.  That he should ever
fall into a thoroughly unpleasant position--wear trousers shrunk with
washing, eat cold mutton, have to walk for want of a horse, or to "duck
under" in any sort of way--was an absurdity irreconcilable with those
cheerful intuitions implanted in him by nature.  And Fred winced under
the idea of being looked down upon as wanting funds for small debts.
Thus it came to pass that the friend whom he chose to apply to was at
once the poorest and the kindest--namely, Caleb Garth.

The Garths were very fond of Fred, as he was of them; for when he and
Rosamond were little ones, and the Garths were better off, the slight
connection between the two families through Mr. Featherstone's double
marriage (the first to Mr. Garth's sister, and the second to Mrs.
Vincy's) had led to an acquaintance which was carried on between the
children rather than the parents: the children drank tea together out
of their toy teacups, and spent whole days together in play.  Mary was
a little hoyden, and Fred at six years old thought her the nicest girl
in the world, making her his wife with a brass ring which he had cut
from an umbrella.  Through all the stages of his education he had kept
his affection for the Garths, and his habit of going to their house as
a second home, though any intercourse between them and the elders of
his family had long ceased.  Even when Caleb Garth was prosperous, the
Vincys were on condescending terms with him and his wife, for there
were nice distinctions of rank in Middlemarch; and though old
manufacturers could not any more than dukes be connected with none but
equals, they were conscious of an inherent social superiority which was
defined with great nicety in practice, though hardly expressible
theoretically.  Since then Mr. Garth had failed in the building
business, which he had unfortunately added to his other avocations of
surveyor, valuer, and agent, had conducted that business for a time
entirely for the benefit of his assignees, and had been living
narrowly, exerting himself to the utmost that he might after all pay
twenty shillings in the pound.  He had now achieved this, and from all
who did not think it a bad precedent, his honorable exertions had won
him due esteem; but in no part of the world is genteel visiting founded
on esteem, in the absence of suitable furniture and complete
dinner-service.  Mrs. Vincy had never been at her ease with Mrs. Garth,
and frequently spoke of her as a woman who had had to work for her
bread--meaning that Mrs. Garth had been a teacher before her marriage;
in which case an intimacy with Lindley Murray and Mangnall's Questions
was something like a draper's discrimination of calico trademarks, or a
courier's acquaintance with foreign countries: no woman who was better
off needed that sort of thing.  And since Mary had been keeping Mr.
Featherstone's house, Mrs. Vincy's want of liking for the Garths had
been converted into something more positive, by alarm lest Fred should
engage himself to this plain girl, whose parents "lived in such a small
way."  Fred, being aware of this, never spoke at home of his visits to
Mrs. Garth, which had of late become more frequent, the increasing
ardor of his affection for Mary inclining him the more towards those
who belonged to her.

Mr. Garth had a small office in the town, and to this Fred went with
his request.  He obtained it without much difficulty, for a large
amount of painful experience had not sufficed to make Caleb Garth
cautious about his own affairs, or distrustful of his fellow-men when
they had not proved themselves untrustworthy; and he had the highest
opinion of Fred, was "sure the lad would turn out well--an open
affectionate fellow, with a good bottom to his character--you might
trust him for anything." Such was Caleb's psychological argument.  He
was one of those rare men who are rigid to themselves and indulgent to
others.  He had a certain shame about his neighbors' errors, and never
spoke of them willingly; hence he was not likely to divert his mind
from the best mode of hardening timber and other ingenious devices in
order to preconceive those errors.  If he had to blame any one, it was
necessary for him to move all the papers within his reach, or describe
various diagrams with his stick, or make calculations with the odd
money in his pocket, before he could begin; and he would rather do
other men's work than find fault with their doing.  I fear he was a bad
disciplinarian.

When Fred stated the circumstances of his debt, his wish to meet it
without troubling his father, and the certainty that the money would be
forthcoming so as to cause no one any inconvenience, Caleb pushed his
spectacles upward, listened, looked into his favorite's clear young
eyes, and believed him, not distinguishing confidence about the future
from veracity about the past; but he felt that it was an occasion for a
friendly hint as to conduct, and that before giving his signature he
must give a rather strong admonition.  Accordingly, he took the paper
and lowered his spectacles, measured the space at his command, reached
his pen and examined it, dipped it in the ink and examined it again,
then pushed the paper a little way from him, lifted up his spectacles
again, showed a deepened depression in the outer angle of his bushy
eyebrows, which gave his face a peculiar mildness (pardon these details
for once--you would have learned to love them if you had known Caleb
Garth), and said in a comfortable tone--

"It was a misfortune, eh, that breaking the horse's knees?  And then,
these exchanges, they don't answer when you have 'cute jockeys to deal
with.  You'll be wiser another time, my boy."

Whereupon Caleb drew down his spectacles, and proceeded to write his
signature with the care which he always gave to that performance; for
whatever he did in the way of business he did well.  He contemplated
the large well-proportioned letters and final flourish, with his head a
trifle on one side for an instant, then handed it to Fred, said
"Good-by," and returned forthwith to his absorption in a plan for Sir
James Chettam's new farm-buildings.

Either because his interest in this work thrust the incident of the
signature from his memory, or for some reason of which Caleb was more
conscious, Mrs. Garth remained ignorant of the affair.

Since it occurred, a change had come over Fred's sky, which altered his
view of the distance, and was the reason why his uncle Featherstone's
present of money was of importance enough to make his color come and
go, first with a too definite expectation, and afterwards with a
proportionate disappointment.  His failure in passing his examination,
had made his accumulation of college debts the more unpardonable by his
father, and there had been an unprecedented storm at home.  Mr. Vincy
had sworn that if he had anything more of that sort to put up with,
Fred should turn out and get his living how he could; and he had never
yet quite recovered his good-humored tone to his son, who had
especially enraged him by saying at this stage of things that he did
not want to be a clergyman, and would rather not "go on with that."
Fred was conscious that he would have been yet more severely dealt with
if his family as well as himself had not secretly regarded him as Mr.
Featherstone's heir; that old gentleman's pride in him, and apparent
fondness for him, serving in the stead of more exemplary conduct--just
as when a youthful nobleman steals jewellery we call the act
kleptomania, speak of it with a philosophical smile, and never think of
his being sent to the house of correction as if he were a ragged boy
who had stolen turnips.  In fact, tacit expectations of what would be
done for him by uncle Featherstone determined the angle at which most
people viewed Fred Vincy in Middlemarch; and in his own consciousness,
what uncle Featherstone would do for him in an emergency, or what he
would do simply as an incorporated luck, formed always an immeasurable
depth of aerial perspective.  But that present of bank-notes, once
made, was measurable, and being applied to the amount of the debt,
showed a deficit which had still to be filled up either by Fred's
"judgment" or by luck in some other shape.  For that little episode of
the alleged borrowing, in which he had made his father the agent in
getting the Bulstrode certificate, was a new reason against going to
his father for money towards meeting his actual debt.  Fred was keen
enough to foresee that anger would confuse distinctions, and that his
denial of having borrowed expressly on the strength of his uncle's will
would be taken as a falsehood.  He had gone to his father and told him
one vexatious affair, and he had left another untold: in such cases the
complete revelation always produces the impression of a previous
duplicity.  Now Fred piqued himself on keeping clear of lies, and even
fibs; he often shrugged his shoulders and made a significant grimace at
what he called Rosamond's fibs (it is only brothers who can associate
such ideas with a lovely girl); and rather than incur the accusation of
falsehood he would even incur some trouble and self-restraint.  It was
under strong inward pressure of this kind that Fred had taken the wise
step of depositing the eighty pounds with his mother.  It was a pity
that he had not at once given them to Mr. Garth; but he meant to make
the sum complete with another sixty, and with a view to this, he had
kept twenty pounds in his own pocket as a sort of seed-corn, which,
planted by judgment, and watered by luck, might yield more than
threefold--a very poor rate of multiplication when the field is a young
gentleman's infinite soul, with all the numerals at command.

Fred was not a gambler: he had not that specific disease in which the
suspension of the whole nervous energy on a chance or risk becomes as
necessary as the dram to the drunkard; he had only the tendency to that
diffusive form of gambling which has no alcoholic intensity, but is
carried on with the healthiest chyle-fed blood, keeping up a joyous
imaginative activity which fashions events according to desire, and
having no fears about its own weather, only sees the advantage there
must be to others in going aboard with it.  Hopefulness has a pleasure
in making a throw of any kind, because the prospect of success is
certain; and only a more generous pleasure in offering as many as
possible a share in the stake.  Fred liked play, especially billiards,
as he liked hunting or riding a steeple-chase; and he only liked it the
better because he wanted money and hoped to win.  But the twenty
pounds' worth of seed-corn had been planted in vain in the seductive
green plot--all of it at least which had not been dispersed by the
roadside--and Fred found himself close upon the term of payment with no
money at command beyond the eighty pounds which he had deposited with
his mother.  The broken-winded horse which he rode represented a
present which had been made to him a long while ago by his uncle
Featherstone: his father always allowed him to keep a horse, Mr.
Vincy's own habits making him regard this as a reasonable demand even
for a son who was rather exasperating.  This horse, then, was Fred's
property, and in his anxiety to meet the imminent bill he determined to
sacrifice a possession without which life would certainly be worth
little.  He made the resolution with a sense of heroism--heroism forced
on him by the dread of breaking his word to Mr. Garth, by his love for
Mary and awe of her opinion.  He would start for Houndsley horse-fair
which was to be held the next morning, and--simply sell his horse,
bringing back the money by coach?--Well, the horse would hardly fetch
more than thirty pounds, and there was no knowing what might happen; it
would be folly to balk himself of luck beforehand.  It was a hundred to
one that some good chance would fall in his way; the longer he thought
of it, the less possible it seemed that he should not have a good
chance, and the less reasonable that he should not equip himself with
the powder and shot for bringing it down.  He would ride to Houndsley
with Bambridge and with Horrock "the vet," and without asking them
anything expressly, he should virtually get the benefit of their
opinion.  Before he set out, Fred got the eighty pounds from his mother.

Most of those who saw Fred riding out of Middlemarch in company with
Bambridge and Horrock, on his way of course to Houndsley horse-fair,
thought that young Vincy was pleasure-seeking as usual; and but for an
unwonted consciousness of grave matters on hand, he himself would have
had a sense of dissipation, and of doing what might be expected of a
gay young fellow.  Considering that Fred was not at all coarse, that he
rather looked down on the manners and speech of young men who had not
been to the university, and that he had written stanzas as pastoral and
unvoluptuous as his flute-playing, his attraction towards Bambridge and
Horrock was an interesting fact which even the love of horse-flesh
would not wholly account for without that mysterious influence of
Naming which determinates so much of mortal choice.  Under any other
name than "pleasure" the society of Messieurs Bambridge and Horrock
must certainly have been regarded as monotonous; and to arrive with
them at Houndsley on a drizzling afternoon, to get down at the Red Lion
in a street shaded with coal-dust, and dine in a room furnished with a
dirt-enamelled map of the county, a bad portrait of an anonymous horse
in a stable, His Majesty George the Fourth with legs and cravat, and
various leaden spittoons, might have seemed a hard business, but for
the sustaining power of nomenclature which determined that the pursuit
of these things was "gay."

In Mr. Horrock there was certainly an apparent unfathomableness which
offered play to the imagination.  Costume, at a glance, gave him a
thrilling association with horses (enough to specify the hat-brim which
took the slightest upward angle just to escape the suspicion of bending
downwards), and nature had given him a face which by dint of Mongolian
eyes, and a nose, mouth, and chin seeming to follow his hat-brim in a
moderate inclination upwards, gave the effect of a subdued unchangeable
sceptical smile, of all expressions the most tyrannous over a
susceptible mind, and, when accompanied by adequate silence, likely to
create the reputation of an invincible understanding, an infinite fund
of humor--too dry to flow, and probably in a state of immovable
crust,--and a critical judgment which, if you could ever be fortunate
enough to know it, would be _the_ thing and no other.  It is a
physiognomy seen in all vocations, but perhaps it has never been more
powerful over the youth of England than in a judge of horses.

Mr. Horrock, at a question from Fred about his horse's fetlock, turned
sideways in his saddle, and watched the horse's action for the space of
three minutes, then turned forward, twitched his own bridle, and
remained silent with a profile neither more nor less sceptical than it
had been.

The part thus played in dialogue by Mr. Horrock was terribly effective.
A mixture of passions was excited in Fred--a mad desire to thrash
Horrock's opinion into utterance, restrained by anxiety to retain the
advantage of his friendship.  There was always the chance that Horrock
might say something quite invaluable at the right moment.

Mr. Bambridge had more open manners, and appeared to give forth his
ideas without economy.  He was loud, robust, and was sometimes spoken
of as being "given to indulgence"--chiefly in swearing, drinking, and
beating his wife.  Some people who had lost by him called him a vicious
man; but he regarded horse-dealing as the finest of the arts, and might
have argued plausibly that it had nothing to do with morality.  He was
undeniably a prosperous man, bore his drinking better than others bore
their moderation, and, on the whole, flourished like the green
bay-tree. But his range of conversation was limited, and like the fine
old tune, "Drops of brandy," gave you after a while a sense of
returning upon itself in a way that might make weak heads dizzy.  But a
slight infusion of Mr. Bambridge was felt to give tone and character to
several circles in Middlemarch; and he was a distinguished figure in
the bar and billiard-room at the Green Dragon.  He knew some anecdotes
about the heroes of the turf, and various clever tricks of Marquesses
and Viscounts which seemed to prove that blood asserted its
pre-eminence even among black-legs; but the minute retentiveness of his
memory was chiefly shown about the horses he had himself bought and
sold; the number of miles they would trot you in no time without
turning a hair being, after the lapse of years, still a subject of
passionate asseveration, in which he would assist the imagination of
his hearers by solemnly swearing that they never saw anything like it.
In short, Mr. Bambridge was a man of pleasure and a gay companion.

Fred was subtle, and did not tell his friends that he was going to
Houndsley bent on selling his horse: he wished to get indirectly at
their genuine opinion of its value, not being aware that a genuine
opinion was the last thing likely to be extracted from such eminent
critics.  It was not Mr. Bambridge's weakness to be a gratuitous
flatterer.  He had never before been so much struck with the fact that
this unfortunate bay was a roarer to a degree which required the
roundest word for perdition to give you any idea of it.

"You made a bad hand at swapping when you went to anybody but me,
Vincy!  Why, you never threw your leg across a finer horse than that
chestnut, and you gave him for this brute.  If you set him cantering,
he goes on like twenty sawyers.  I never heard but one worse roarer in
my life, and that was a roan: it belonged to Pegwell, the corn-factor;
he used to drive him in his gig seven years ago, and he wanted me to
take him, but I said, 'Thank you, Peg, I don't deal in
wind-instruments.' That was what I said.  It went the round of the
country, that joke did.  But, what the hell! the horse was a penny
trumpet to that roarer of yours."

"Why, you said just now his was worse than mine," said Fred, more
irritable than usual.

"I said a lie, then," said Mr. Bambridge, emphatically.  "There wasn't
a penny to choose between 'em."

Fred spurred his horse, and they trotted on a little way.  When they
slackened again, Mr. Bambridge said--

"Not but what the roan was a better trotter than yours."

"I'm quite satisfied with his paces, I know," said Fred, who required
all the consciousness of being in gay company to support him; "I say
his trot is an uncommonly clean one, eh, Horrock?"

Mr. Horrock looked before him with as complete a neutrality as if he
had been a portrait by a great master.

Fred gave up the fallacious hope of getting a genuine opinion; but on
reflection he saw that Bambridge's depreciation and Horrock's silence
were both virtually encouraging, and indicated that they thought better
of the horse than they chose to say.

That very evening, indeed, before the fair had set in, Fred thought he
saw a favorable opening for disposing advantageously of his horse, but
an opening which made him congratulate himself on his foresight in
bringing with him his eighty pounds.  A young farmer, acquainted with
Mr. Bambridge, came into the Red Lion, and entered into conversation
about parting with a hunter, which he introduced at once as Diamond,
implying that it was a public character.  For himself he only wanted a
useful hack, which would draw upon occasion; being about to marry and
to give up hunting.  The hunter was in a friend's stable at some little
distance; there was still time for gentlemen to see it before dark.
The friend's stable had to be reached through a back street where you
might as easily have been poisoned without expense of drugs as in any
grim street of that unsanitary period.  Fred was not fortified against
disgust by brandy, as his companions were, but the hope of having at
last seen the horse that would enable him to make money was
exhilarating enough to lead him over the same ground again the first
thing in the morning.  He felt sure that if he did not come to a
bargain with the farmer, Bambridge would; for the stress of
circumstances, Fred felt, was sharpening his acuteness and endowing him
with all the constructive power of suspicion.  Bambridge had run down
Diamond in a way that he never would have done (the horse being a
friend's) if he had not thought of buying it; every one who looked at
the animal--even Horrock--was evidently impressed with its merit.  To
get all the advantage of being with men of this sort, you must know how
to draw your inferences, and not be a spoon who takes things literally.
The color of the horse was a dappled gray, and Fred happened to know
that Lord Medlicote's man was on the look-out for just such a horse.
After all his running down, Bambridge let it out in the course of the
evening, when the farmer was absent, that he had seen worse horses go
for eighty pounds.  Of course he contradicted himself twenty times
over, but when you know what is likely to be true you can test a man's
admissions.  And Fred could not but reckon his own judgment of a horse
as worth something.  The farmer had paused over Fred's respectable
though broken-winded steed long enough to show that he thought it worth
consideration, and it seemed probable that he would take it, with
five-and-twenty pounds in addition, as the equivalent of Diamond.  In
that case Fred, when he had parted with his new horse for at least
eighty pounds, would be fifty-five pounds in pocket by the transaction,
and would have a hundred and thirty-five pounds towards meeting the
bill; so that the deficit temporarily thrown on Mr. Garth would at the
utmost be twenty-five pounds.  By the time he was hurrying on his
clothes in the morning, he saw so clearly the importance of not losing
this rare chance, that if Bambridge and Horrock had both dissuaded him,
he would not have been deluded into a direct interpretation of their
purpose: he would have been aware that those deep hands held something
else than a young fellow's interest.  With regard to horses, distrust
was your only clew.  But scepticism, as we know, can never be
thoroughly applied, else life would come to a standstill: something we
must believe in and do, and whatever that something may be called, it
is virtually our own judgment, even when it seems like the most slavish
reliance on another.  Fred believed in the excellence of his bargain,
and even before the fair had well set in, had got possession of the
dappled gray, at the price of his old horse and thirty pounds in
addition--only five pounds more than he had expected to give.

But he felt a little worried and wearied, perhaps with mental debate,
and without waiting for the further gayeties of the horse-fair, he set
out alone on his fourteen miles' journey, meaning to take it very
quietly and keep his horse fresh.



CHAPTER XXIV.

    "The offender's sorrow brings but small relief
     To him who wears the strong offence's cross."
                                        --SHAKESPEARE: Sonnets.


I am sorry to say that only the third day after the propitious events
at Houndsley Fred Vincy had fallen into worse spirits than he had known
in his life before.  Not that he had been disappointed as to the
possible market for his horse, but that before the bargain could be
concluded with Lord Medlicote's man, this Diamond, in which hope to the
amount of eighty pounds had been invested, had without the slightest
warning exhibited in the stable a most vicious energy in kicking, had
just missed killing the groom, and had ended in laming himself severely
by catching his leg in a rope that overhung the stable-board. There was
no more redress for this than for the discovery of bad temper after
marriage--which of course old companions were aware of before the
ceremony.  For some reason or other, Fred had none of his usual
elasticity under this stroke of ill-fortune: he was simply aware that
he had only fifty pounds, that there was no chance of his getting any
more at present, and that the bill for a hundred and sixty would be
presented in five days.  Even if he had applied to his father on the
plea that Mr. Garth should be saved from loss, Fred felt smartingly
that his father would angrily refuse to rescue Mr. Garth from the
consequence of what he would call encouraging extravagance and deceit.
He was so utterly downcast that he could frame no other project than to
go straight to Mr. Garth and tell him the sad truth, carrying with him
the fifty pounds, and getting that sum at least safely out of his own
hands.  His father, being at the warehouse, did not yet know of the
accident: when he did, he would storm about the vicious brute being
brought into his stable; and before meeting that lesser annoyance Fred
wanted to get away with all his courage to face the greater.  He took
his father's nag, for he had made up his mind that when he had told Mr.
Garth, he would ride to Stone Court and confess all to Mary.  In fact,
it is probable that but for Mary's existence and Fred's love for her,
his conscience would have been much less active both in previously
urging the debt on his thought and impelling him not to spare himself
after his usual fashion by deferring an unpleasant task, but to act as
directly and simply as he could.  Even much stronger mortals than Fred
Vincy hold half their rectitude in the mind of the being they love
best.  "The theatre of all my actions is fallen," said an antique
personage when his chief friend was dead; and they are fortunate who
get a theatre where the audience demands their best.  Certainly it
would have made a considerable difference to Fred at that time if Mary
Garth had had no decided notions as to what was admirable in character.

Mr. Garth was not at the office, and Fred rode on to his house, which
was a little way outside the town--a homely place with an orchard in
front of it, a rambling, old-fashioned, half-timbered building, which
before the town had spread had been a farm-house, but was now
surrounded with the private gardens of the townsmen.  We get the fonder
of our houses if they have a physiognomy of their own, as our friends
have.  The Garth family, which was rather a large one, for Mary had
four brothers and one sister, were very fond of their old house, from
which all the best furniture had long been sold.  Fred liked it too,
knowing it by heart even to the attic which smelt deliciously of apples
and quinces, and until to-day he had never come to it without pleasant
expectations; but his heart beat uneasily now with the sense that he
should probably have to make his confession before Mrs. Garth, of whom
he was rather more in awe than of her husband.  Not that she was
inclined to sarcasm and to impulsive sallies, as Mary was.  In her
present matronly age at least, Mrs. Garth never committed herself by
over-hasty speech; having, as she said, borne the yoke in her youth,
and learned self-control. She had that rare sense which discerns what
is unalterable, and submits to it without murmuring.  Adoring her
husband's virtues, she had very early made up her mind to his
incapacity of minding his own interests, and had met the consequences
cheerfully.  She had been magnanimous enough to renounce all pride in
teapots or children's frilling, and had never poured any pathetic
confidences into the ears of her feminine neighbors concerning Mr.
Garth's want of prudence and the sums he might have had if he had been
like other men.  Hence these fair neighbors thought her either proud or
eccentric, and sometimes spoke of her to their husbands as "your fine
Mrs. Garth." She was not without her criticism of them in return, being
more accurately instructed than most matrons in Middlemarch, and--where
is the blameless woman?--apt to be a little severe towards her own sex,
which in her opinion was framed to be entirely subordinate.  On the
other hand, she was disproportionately indulgent towards the failings
of men, and was often heard to say that these were natural.  Also, it
must be admitted that Mrs. Garth was a trifle too emphatic in her
resistance to what she held to be follies: the passage from governess
into housewife had wrought itself a little too strongly into her
consciousness, and she rarely forgot that while her grammar and accent
were above the town standard, she wore a plain cap, cooked the family
dinner, and darned all the stockings.  She had sometimes taken pupils
in a peripatetic fashion, making them follow her about in the kitchen
with their book or slate.  She thought it good for them to see that she
could make an excellent lather while she corrected their blunders
"without looking,"--that a woman with her sleeves tucked up above her
elbows might know all about the Subjunctive Mood or the Torrid
Zone--that, in short, she might possess "education" and other good
things ending in "tion," and worthy to be pronounced emphatically,
without being a useless doll.  When she made remarks to this edifying
effect, she had a firm little frown on her brow, which yet did not
hinder her face from looking benevolent, and her words which came forth
like a procession were uttered in a fervid agreeable contralto.
Certainly, the exemplary Mrs. Garth had her droll aspects, but her
character sustained her oddities, as a very fine wine sustains a flavor
of skin.

Towards Fred Vincy she had a motherly feeling, and had always been
disposed to excuse his errors, though she would probably not have
excused Mary for engaging herself to him, her daughter being included
in that more rigorous judgment which she applied to her own sex.  But
this very fact of her exceptional indulgence towards him made it the
harder to Fred that he must now inevitably sink in her opinion.  And
the circumstances of his visit turned out to be still more unpleasant
than he had expected; for Caleb Garth had gone out early to look at
some repairs not far off.  Mrs. Garth at certain hours was always in
the kitchen, and this morning she was carrying on several occupations
at once there--making her pies at the well-scoured deal table on one
side of that airy room, observing Sally's movements at the oven and
dough-tub through an open door, and giving lessons to her youngest boy
and girl, who were standing opposite to her at the table with their
books and slates before them.  A tub and a clothes-horse at the other
end of the kitchen indicated an intermittent wash of small things also
going on.

Mrs. Garth, with her sleeves turned above her elbows, deftly handling
her pastry--applying her rolling-pin and giving ornamental pinches,
while she expounded with grammatical fervor what were the right views
about the concord of verbs and pronouns with "nouns of multitude or
signifying many," was a sight agreeably amusing.  She was of the same
curly-haired, square-faced type as Mary, but handsomer, with more
delicacy of feature, a pale skin, a solid matronly figure, and a
remarkable firmness of glance.  In her snowy-frilled cap she reminded
one of that delightful Frenchwoman whom we have all seen marketing,
basket on arm.  Looking at the mother, you might hope that the daughter
would become like her, which is a prospective advantage equal to a
dowry--the mother too often standing behind the daughter like a
malignant prophecy--"Such as I am, she will shortly be."

"Now let us go through that once more," said Mrs. Garth, pinching an
apple-puff which seemed to distract Ben, an energetic young male with a
heavy brow, from due attention to the lesson.  "'Not without regard to
the import of the word as conveying unity or plurality of idea'--tell
me again what that means, Ben."

(Mrs. Garth, like more celebrated educators, had her favorite ancient
paths, and in a general wreck of society would have tried to hold her
"Lindley Murray" above the waves.)

"Oh--it means--you must think what you mean," said Ben, rather
peevishly.  "I hate grammar.  What's the use of it?"

"To teach you to speak and write correctly, so that you can be
understood," said Mrs. Garth, with severe precision.  "Should you like
to speak as old Job does?"

"Yes," said Ben, stoutly; "it's funnier.  He says, 'Yo goo'--that's
just as good as 'You go.'"

"But he says, 'A ship's in the garden,' instead of 'a sheep,'" said
Letty, with an air of superiority.  "You might think he meant a ship
off the sea."

"No, you mightn't, if you weren't silly," said Ben.  "How could a ship
off the sea come there?"

"These things belong only to pronunciation, which is the least part of
grammar," said Mrs. Garth.  "That apple-peel is to be eaten by the
pigs, Ben; if you eat it, I must give them your piece of pasty.  Job
has only to speak about very plain things.  How do you think you would
write or speak about anything more difficult, if you knew no more of
grammar than he does?  You would use wrong words, and put words in the
wrong places, and instead of making people understand you, they would
turn away from you as a tiresome person.  What would you do then?"

"I shouldn't care, I should leave off," said Ben, with a sense that
this was an agreeable issue where grammar was concerned.

"I see you are getting tired and stupid, Ben," said Mrs. Garth,
accustomed to these obstructive arguments from her male offspring.
Having finished her pies, she moved towards the clothes-horse, and
said, "Come here and tell me the story I told you on Wednesday, about
Cincinnatus."

"I know! he was a farmer," said Ben.

"Now, Ben, he was a Roman--let _me_ tell," said Letty, using her elbow
contentiously.

"You silly thing, he was a Roman farmer, and he was ploughing."

"Yes, but before that--that didn't come first--people wanted him," said
Letty.

"Well, but you must say what sort of a man he was first," insisted Ben.
"He was a wise man, like my father, and that made the people want his
advice.  And he was a brave man, and could fight.  And so could my
father--couldn't he, mother?"

"Now, Ben, let me tell the story straight on, as mother told it us,"
said Letty, frowning.  "Please, mother, tell Ben not to speak."

"Letty, I am ashamed of you," said her mother, wringing out the caps
from the tub.  "When your brother began, you ought to have waited to
see if he could not tell the story.  How rude you look, pushing and
frowning, as if you wanted to conquer with your elbows!  Cincinnatus, I
am sure, would have been sorry to see his daughter behave so."  (Mrs.
Garth delivered this awful sentence with much majesty of enunciation,
and Letty felt that between repressed volubility and general disesteem,
that of the Romans inclusive, life was already a painful affair.) "Now,
Ben."

"Well--oh--well--why, there was a great deal of fighting, and they were
all blockheads, and--I can't tell it just how you told it--but they
wanted a man to be captain and king and everything--"

"Dictator, now," said Letty, with injured looks, and not without a wish
to make her mother repent.

"Very well, dictator!" said Ben, contemptuously.  "But that isn't a
good word: he didn't tell them to write on slates."

"Come, come, Ben, you are not so ignorant as that," said Mrs. Garth,
carefully serious.  "Hark, there is a knock at the door!  Run, Letty,
and open it."

The knock was Fred's; and when Letty said that her father was not in
yet, but that her mother was in the kitchen, Fred had no alternative.
He could not depart from his usual practice of going to see Mrs. Garth
in the kitchen if she happened to be at work there.  He put his arm
round Letty's neck silently, and led her into the kitchen without his
usual jokes and caresses.

Mrs. Garth was surprised to see Fred at this hour, but surprise was not
a feeling that she was given to express, and she only said, quietly
continuing her work--

"You, Fred, so early in the day?  You look quite pale.  Has anything
happened?"

"I want to speak to Mr. Garth," said Fred, not yet ready to say
more--"and to you also," he added, after a little pause, for he had no
doubt that Mrs. Garth knew everything about the bill, and he must in the
end speak of it before her, if not to her solely.

"Caleb will be in again in a few minutes," said Mrs. Garth, who
imagined some trouble between Fred and his father.  "He is sure not to
be long, because he has some work at his desk that must be done this
morning.  Do you mind staying with me, while I finish my matters here?"

"But we needn't go on about Cincinnatus, need we?" said Ben, who had
taken Fred's whip out of his hand, and was trying its efficiency on the
cat.

"No, go out now.  But put that whip down.  How very mean of you to whip
poor old Tortoise!  Pray take the whip from him, Fred."

"Come, old boy, give it me," said Fred, putting out his hand.

"Will you let me ride on your horse to-day?" said Ben, rendering up the
whip, with an air of not being obliged to do it.

"Not to-day--another time.  I am not riding my own horse."

"Shall you see Mary to-day?"

"Yes, I think so," said Fred, with an unpleasant twinge.

"Tell her to come home soon, and play at forfeits, and make fun."

"Enough, enough, Ben! run away," said Mrs. Garth, seeing that Fred was
teased. . .

"Are Letty and Ben your only pupils now, Mrs. Garth?" said Fred, when
the children were gone and it was needful to say something that would
pass the time.  He was not yet sure whether he should wait for Mr.
Garth, or use any good opportunity in conversation to confess to Mrs.
Garth herself, give her the money and ride away.

"One--only one.  Fanny Hackbutt comes at half past eleven.  I am not
getting a great income now," said Mrs. Garth, smiling.  "I am at a low
ebb with pupils.  But I have saved my little purse for Alfred's
premium: I have ninety-two pounds.  He can go to Mr. Hanmer's now; he
is just at the right age."

This did not lead well towards the news that Mr. Garth was on the brink
of losing ninety-two pounds and more.  Fred was silent.  "Young
gentlemen who go to college are rather more costly than that," Mrs.
Garth innocently continued, pulling out the edging on a cap-border.
"And Caleb thinks that Alfred will turn out a distinguished engineer:
he wants to give the boy a good chance.  There he is!  I hear him
coming in.  We will go to him in the parlor, shall we?"

When they entered the parlor Caleb had thrown down his hat and was
seated at his desk.

"What!  Fred, my boy!" he said, in a tone of mild surprise, holding his
pen still undipped; "you are here betimes."  But missing the usual
expression of cheerful greeting in Fred's face, he immediately added,
"Is there anything up at home?--anything the matter?"

"Yes, Mr. Garth, I am come to tell something that I am afraid will give
you a bad opinion of me.  I am come to tell you and Mrs. Garth that I
can't keep my word.  I can't find the money to meet the bill after all.
I have been unfortunate; I have only got these fifty pounds towards the
hundred and sixty."

While Fred was speaking, he had taken out the notes and laid them on
the desk before Mr. Garth.  He had burst forth at once with the plain
fact, feeling boyishly miserable and without verbal resources.  Mrs.
Garth was mutely astonished, and looked at her husband for an
explanation.  Caleb blushed, and after a little pause said--

"Oh, I didn't tell you, Susan: I put my name to a bill for Fred; it was
for a hundred and sixty pounds.  He made sure he could meet it himself."

There was an evident change in Mrs. Garth's face, but it was like a
change below the surface of water which remains smooth.  She fixed her
eyes on Fred, saying--

"I suppose you have asked your father for the rest of the money and he
has refused you."

"No," said Fred, biting his lip, and speaking with more difficulty;
"but I know it will be of no use to ask him; and unless it were of use,
I should not like to mention Mr. Garth's name in the matter."

"It has come at an unfortunate time," said Caleb, in his hesitating
way, looking down at the notes and nervously fingering the paper,
"Christmas upon us--I'm rather hard up just now.  You see, I have to
cut out everything like a tailor with short measure.  What can we do,
Susan?  I shall want every farthing we have in the bank.  It's a
hundred and ten pounds, the deuce take it!"

"I must give you the ninety-two pounds that I have put by for Alfred's
premium," said Mrs. Garth, gravely and decisively, though a nice ear
might have discerned a slight tremor in some of the words.  "And I have
no doubt that Mary has twenty pounds saved from her salary by this
time.  She will advance it."

Mrs. Garth had not again looked at Fred, and was not in the least
calculating what words she should use to cut him the most effectively.
Like the eccentric woman she was, she was at present absorbed in
considering what was to be done, and did not fancy that the end could
be better achieved by bitter remarks or explosions.  But she had made
Fred feel for the first time something like the tooth of remorse.
Curiously enough, his pain in the affair beforehand had consisted
almost entirely in the sense that he must seem dishonorable, and sink
in the opinion of the Garths: he had not occupied himself with the
inconvenience and possible injury that his breach might occasion them,
for this exercise of the imagination on other people's needs is not
common with hopeful young gentlemen.  Indeed we are most of us brought
up in the notion that the highest motive for not doing a wrong is
something irrespective of the beings who would suffer the wrong.  But
at this moment he suddenly saw himself as a pitiful rascal who was
robbing two women of their savings.

"I shall certainly pay it all, Mrs. Garth--ultimately," he stammered
out.

"Yes, ultimately," said Mrs. Garth, who having a special dislike to
fine words on ugly occasions, could not now repress an epigram.  "But
boys cannot well be apprenticed ultimately: they should be apprenticed
at fifteen."  She had never been so little inclined to make excuses for
Fred.

"I was the most in the wrong, Susan," said Caleb.  "Fred made sure of
finding the money.  But I'd no business to be fingering bills.  I
suppose you have looked all round and tried all honest means?" he
added, fixing his merciful gray eyes on Fred.  Caleb was too delicate,
to specify Mr. Featherstone.

"Yes, I have tried everything--I really have.  I should have had a
hundred and thirty pounds ready but for a misfortune with a horse which
I was about to sell.  My uncle had given me eighty pounds, and I paid
away thirty with my old horse in order to get another which I was going
to sell for eighty or more--I meant to go without a horse--but now it
has turned out vicious and lamed itself.  I wish I and the horses too
had been at the devil, before I had brought this on you.  There's no
one else I care so much for: you and Mrs. Garth have always been so
kind to me.  However, it's no use saying that.  You will always think
me a rascal now."

Fred turned round and hurried out of the room, conscious that he was
getting rather womanish, and feeling confusedly that his being sorry
was not of much use to the Garths.  They could see him mount, and
quickly pass through the gate.

"I am disappointed in Fred Vincy," said Mrs. Garth.  "I would not have
believed beforehand that he would have drawn you into his debts.  I
knew he was extravagant, but I did not think that he would be so mean
as to hang his risks on his oldest friend, who could the least afford
to lose."

"I was a fool, Susan:"

"That you were," said the wife, nodding and smiling.  "But I should not
have gone to publish it in the market-place. Why should you keep such
things from me?  It is just so with your buttons: you let them burst
off without telling me, and go out with your wristband hanging.  If I
had only known I might have been ready with some better plan."

"You are sadly cut up, I know, Susan," said Caleb, looking feelingly at
her.  "I can't abide your losing the money you've scraped together for
Alfred."

"It is very well that I _had_ scraped it together; and it is you who
will have to suffer, for you must teach the boy yourself.  You must
give up your bad habits.  Some men take to drinking, and you have taken
to working without pay.  You must indulge yourself a little less in
that.  And you must ride over to Mary, and ask the child what money she
has."

Caleb had pushed his chair back, and was leaning forward, shaking his
head slowly, and fitting his finger-tips together with much nicety.

"Poor Mary!" he said.  "Susan," he went on in a lowered tone, "I'm
afraid she may be fond of Fred."

"Oh no!  She always laughs at him; and he is not likely to think of her
in any other than a brotherly way."

Caleb made no rejoinder, but presently lowered his spectacles, drew up
his chair to the desk, and said, "Deuce take the bill--I wish it was
at Hanover!  These things are a sad interruption to business!"

The first part of this speech comprised his whole store of maledictory
expression, and was uttered with a slight snarl easy to imagine.  But
it would be difficult to convey to those who never heard him utter the
word "business," the peculiar tone of fervid veneration, of religious
regard, in which he wrapped it, as a consecrated symbol is wrapped in
its gold-fringed linen.

Caleb Garth often shook his head in meditation on the value, the
indispensable might of that myriad-headed, myriad-handed labor by which
the social body is fed, clothed, and housed.  It had laid hold of his
imagination in boyhood.  The echoes of the great hammer where roof or
keel were a-making, the signal-shouts of the workmen, the roar of the
furnace, the thunder and plash of the engine, were a sublime music to
him; the felling and lading of timber, and the huge trunk vibrating
star-like in the distance along the highway, the crane at work on the
wharf, the piled-up produce in warehouses, the precision and variety of
muscular effort wherever exact work had to be turned out,--all these
sights of his youth had acted on him as poetry without the aid of the
poets, had made a philosophy for him without the aid of philosophers,
a religion without the aid of theology.  His early ambition had been to
have as effective a share as possible in this sublime labor, which was
peculiarly dignified by him with the name of "business;" and though he
had only been a short time under a surveyor, and had been chiefly his
own teacher, he knew more of land, building, and mining than most of
the special men in the county.

His classification of human employments was rather crude, and, like the
categories of more celebrated men, would not be acceptable in these
advanced times.  He divided them into "business, politics, preaching,
learning, and amusement."  He had nothing to say against the last four;
but he regarded them as a reverential pagan regarded other gods than
his own.  In the same way, he thought very well of all ranks, but he
would not himself have liked to be of any rank in which he had not such
close contact with "business" as to get often honorably decorated with
marks of dust and mortar, the damp of the engine, or the sweet soil of
the woods and fields.  Though he had never regarded himself as other
than an orthodox Christian, and would argue on prevenient grace if the
subject were proposed to him, I think his virtual divinities were good
practical schemes, accurate work, and the faithful completion of
undertakings: his prince of darkness was a slack workman.  But there
was no spirit of denial in Caleb, and the world seemed so wondrous to
him that he was ready to accept any number of systems, like any number
of firmaments, if they did not obviously interfere with the best
land-drainage, solid building, correct measuring, and judicious boring
(for coal). In fact, he had a reverential soul with a strong practical
intelligence.  But he could not manage finance: he knew values well,
but he had no keenness of imagination for monetary results in the shape
of profit and loss: and having ascertained this to his cost, he
determined to give up all forms of his beloved "business" which
required that talent.  He gave himself up entirely to the many kinds of
work which he could do without handling capital, and was one of those
precious men within his own district whom everybody would choose to
work for them, because he did his work well, charged very little, and
often declined to charge at all.  It is no wonder, then, that the
Garths were poor, and "lived in a small way."  However, they did not
mind it.



CHAPTER XXV.

    "Love seeketh not itself to please,
       Nor for itself hath any care
     But for another gives its ease
       And builds a heaven in hell's despair.
          .    .    .    .    .    .    .
     Love seeketh only self to please,
       To bind another to its delight,
     Joys in another's loss of ease,
       And builds a hell in heaven's despite."
                       --W. BLAKE: Songs of Experience


Fred Vincy wanted to arrive at Stone Court when Mary could not expect
him, and when his uncle was not down-stairs in that case she might be
sitting alone in the wainscoted parlor.  He left his horse in the yard
to avoid making a noise on the gravel in front, and entered the parlor
without other notice than the noise of the door-handle. Mary was in her
usual corner, laughing over Mrs. Piozzi's recollections of Johnson, and
looked up with the fun still in her face.  It gradually faded as she
saw Fred approach her without speaking, and stand before her with his
elbow on the mantel-piece, looking ill.  She too was silent, only
raising her eyes to him inquiringly.

"Mary," he began, "I am a good-for-nothing blackguard."

"I should think one of those epithets would do at a time," said Mary,
trying to smile, but feeling alarmed.

"I know you will never think well of me any more.  You will think me a
liar.  You will think me dishonest.  You will think I didn't care for
you, or your father and mother.  You always do make the worst of me, I
know."

"I cannot deny that I shall think all that of you, Fred, if you give me
good reasons.  But please to tell me at once what you have done.  I
would rather know the painful truth than imagine it."

"I owed money--a hundred and sixty pounds.  I asked your father to put
his name to a bill.  I thought it would not signify to him.  I made
sure of paying the money myself, and I have tried as hard as I could.
And now, I have been so unlucky--a horse has turned out badly--I can
only pay fifty pounds.  And I can't ask my father for the money: he
would not give me a farthing.  And my uncle gave me a hundred a little
while ago.  So what can I do?  And now your father has no ready money
to spare, and your mother will have to pay away her ninety-two pounds
that she has saved, and she says your savings must go too.  You see
what a--"

"Oh, poor mother, poor father!" said Mary, her eyes filling with tears,
and a little sob rising which she tried to repress.  She looked
straight before her and took no notice of Fred, all the consequences at
home becoming present to her.  He too remained silent for some moments,
feeling more miserable than ever.  "I wouldn't have hurt you for the
world, Mary," he said at last.  "You can never forgive me."

"What does it matter whether I forgive you?" said Mary, passionately.
"Would that make it any better for my mother to lose the money she has
been earning by lessons for four years, that she might send Alfred to
Mr. Hanmer's? Should you think all that pleasant enough if I forgave
you?"

"Say what you like, Mary.  I deserve it all."

"I don't want to say anything," said Mary, more quietly, "and my anger
is of no use."  She dried her eyes, threw aside her book, rose and
fetched her sewing.

Fred followed her with his eyes, hoping that they would meet hers, and
in that way find access for his imploring penitence.  But no!  Mary
could easily avoid looking upward.

"I do care about your mother's money going," he said, when she was
seated again and sewing quickly.  "I wanted to ask you, Mary--don't
you think that Mr. Featherstone--if you were to tell him--tell him, I
mean, about apprenticing Alfred--would advance the money?"

"My family is not fond of begging, Fred.  We would rather work for our
money.  Besides, you say that Mr. Featherstone has lately given you a
hundred pounds.  He rarely makes presents; he has never made presents
to us.  I am sure my father will not ask him for anything; and even if
I chose to beg of him, it would be of no use."

"I am so miserable, Mary--if you knew how miserable I am, you would be
sorry for me."

"There are other things to be more sorry for than that.  But selfish
people always think their own discomfort of more importance than
anything else in the world.  I see enough of that every day."

"It is hardly fair to call me selfish.  If you knew what things other
young men do, you would think me a good way off the worst."

"I know that people who spend a great deal of money on themselves
without knowing how they shall pay, must be selfish.  They are always
thinking of what they can get for themselves, and not of what other
people may lose."

"Any man may be unfortunate, Mary, and find himself unable to pay when
he meant it.  There is not a better man in the world than your father,
and yet he got into trouble."

"How dare you make any comparison between my father and you, Fred?"
said Mary, in a deep tone of indignation.  "He never got into trouble
by thinking of his own idle pleasures, but because he was always
thinking of the work he was doing for other people.  And he has fared
hard, and worked hard to make good everybody's loss."

"And you think that I shall never try to make good anything, Mary.  It
is not generous to believe the worst of a man.  When you have got any
power over him, I think you might try and use it to make him better;
but that is what you never do.  However, I'm going," Fred ended,
languidly.  "I shall never speak to you about anything again.  I'm very
sorry for all the trouble I've caused--that's all."

Mary had dropped her work out of her hand and looked up.  There is
often something maternal even in a girlish love, and Mary's hard
experience had wrought her nature to an impressibility very different
from that hard slight thing which we call girlishness.  At Fred's last
words she felt an instantaneous pang, something like what a mother
feels at the imagined sobs or cries of her naughty truant child, which
may lose itself and get harm.  And when, looking up, her eyes met his
dull despairing glance, her pity for him surmounted her anger and all
her other anxieties.

"Oh, Fred, how ill you look!  Sit down a moment.  Don't go yet.  Let me
tell uncle that you are here.  He has been wondering that he has not
seen you for a whole week."  Mary spoke hurriedly, saying the words
that came first without knowing very well what they were, but saying
them in a half-soothing half-beseeching tone, and rising as if to go
away to Mr. Featherstone.  Of course Fred felt as if the clouds had
parted and a gleam had come: he moved and stood in her way.

"Say one word, Mary, and I will do anything.  Say you will not think
the worst of me--will not give me up altogether."

"As if it were any pleasure to me to think ill of you," said Mary, in a
mournful tone.  "As if it were not very painful to me to see you an
idle frivolous creature.  How can you bear to be so contemptible, when
others are working and striving, and there are so many things to be
done--how can you bear to be fit for nothing in the world that is
useful?  And with so much good in your disposition, Fred,--you might
be worth a great deal."

"I will try to be anything you like, Mary, if you will say that you
love me."

"I should be ashamed to say that I loved a man who must always be
hanging on others, and reckoning on what they would do for him.  What
will you be when you are forty?  Like Mr. Bowyer, I suppose--just as
idle, living in Mrs. Beck's front parlor--fat and shabby, hoping
somebody will invite you to dinner--spending your morning in learning a
comic song--oh no! learning a tune on the flute."

Mary's lips had begun to curl with a smile as soon as she had asked
that question about Fred's future (young souls are mobile), and before
she ended, her face had its full illumination of fun.  To him it was
like the cessation of an ache that Mary could laugh at him, and with a
passive sort of smile he tried to reach her hand; but she slipped away
quickly towards the door and said, "I shall tell uncle.  You _must_ see
him for a moment or two."

Fred secretly felt that his future was guaranteed against the
fulfilment of Mary's sarcastic prophecies, apart from that "anything"
which he was ready to do if she would define it. He never dared in
Mary's presence to approach the subject of his expectations from Mr.
Featherstone, and she always ignored them, as if everything depended on
himself.  But if ever he actually came into the property, she must
recognize the change in his position.  All this passed through his mind
somewhat languidly, before he went up to see his uncle.  He stayed but
a little while, excusing himself on the ground that he had a cold; and
Mary did not reappear before he left the house.  But as he rode home,
he began to be more conscious of being ill, than of being melancholy.

When Caleb Garth arrived at Stone Court soon after dusk, Mary was not
surprised, although he seldom had leisure for paying her a visit, and
was not at all fond of having to talk with Mr. Featherstone.  The old
man, on the other hand, felt himself ill at ease with a brother-in-law
whom he could not annoy, who did not mind about being considered poor,
had nothing to ask of him, and understood all kinds of farming and
mining business better than he did.  But Mary had felt sure that her
parents would want to see her, and if her father had not come, she
would have obtained leave to go home for an hour or two the next day.
After discussing prices during tea with Mr. Featherstone Caleb rose to
bid him good-by, and said, "I want to speak to you, Mary."

She took a candle into another large parlor, where there was no fire,
and setting down the feeble light on the dark mahogany table, turned
round to her father, and putting her arms round his neck kissed him
with childish kisses which he delighted in,--the expression of his
large brows softening as the expression of a great beautiful dog
softens when it is caressed.  Mary was his favorite child, and whatever
Susan might say, and right as she was on all other subjects, Caleb
thought it natural that Fred or any one else should think Mary more
lovable than other girls.

"I've got something to tell you, my dear," said Caleb in his hesitating
way.  "No very good news; but then it might be worse."

"About money, father?  I think I know what it is."

"Ay? how can that be?  You see, I've been a bit of a fool again, and
put my name to a bill, and now it comes to paying; and your mother has
got to part with her savings, that's the worst of it, and even they
won't quite make things even.  We wanted a hundred and ten pounds: your
mother has ninety-two, and I have none to spare in the bank; and she
thinks that you have some savings."

"Oh yes; I have more than four-and-twenty pounds.  I thought you would
come, father, so I put it in my bag.  See! beautiful white notes and
gold."

Mary took out the folded money from her reticule and put it into her
father's hand.

"Well, but how--we only want eighteen--here, put the rest back,
child,--but how did you know about it?" said Caleb, who, in his
unconquerable indifference to money, was beginning to be chiefly
concerned about the relation the affair might have to Mary's affections.

"Fred told me this morning."

"Ah!  Did he come on purpose?"

"Yes, I think so.  He was a good deal distressed."

"I'm afraid Fred is not to be trusted, Mary," said the father, with
hesitating tenderness.  "He means better than he acts, perhaps.  But I
should think it a pity for any body's happiness to be wrapped up in
him, and so would your mother."

"And so should I, father," said Mary, not looking up, but putting the
back of her father's hand against her cheek.

"I don't want to pry, my dear.  But I was afraid there might be
something between you and Fred, and I wanted to caution you.  You see,
Mary"--here Caleb's voice became more tender; he had been pushing his
hat about on the table and looking at it, but finally he turned his
eyes on his daughter--"a woman, let her be as good as she may, has got
to put up with the life her husband makes for her.  Your mother has had
to put up with a good deal because of me."

Mary turned the back of her father's hand to her lips and smiled at him.

"Well, well, nobody's perfect, but"--here Mr. Garth shook his head to
help out the inadequacy of words--"what I am thinking of is--what it
must be for a wife when she's never sure of her husband, when he hasn't
got a principle in him to make him more afraid of doing the wrong thing
by others than of getting his own toes pinched.  That's the long and
the short of it, Mary.  Young folks may get fond of each other before
they know what life is, and they may think it all holiday if they can
only get together; but it soon turns into working day, my dear.
However, you have more sense than most, and you haven't been kept in
cotton-wool: there may be no occasion for me to say this, but a father
trembles for his daughter, and you are all by yourself here."

"Don't fear for me, father," said Mary, gravely meeting her father's
eyes; "Fred has always been very good to me; he is kind-hearted and
affectionate, and not false, I think, with all his self-indulgence. But
I will never engage myself to one who has no manly independence, and
who goes on loitering away his time on the chance that others will
provide for him.  You and my mother have taught me too much pride for
that."

"That's right--that's right.  Then I am easy," said Mr. Garth, taking
up his hat.  "But it's hard to run away with your earnings, eh child."

"Father!" said Mary, in her deepest tone of remonstrance.  "Take
pocketfuls of love besides to them all at home," was her last word
before he closed the outer door on himself.

"I suppose your father wanted your earnings," said old Mr.
Featherstone, with his usual power of unpleasant surmise, when Mary
returned to him.  "He makes but a tight fit, I reckon.  You're of age
now; you ought to be saving for yourself."

"I consider my father and mother the best part of myself, sir," said
Mary, coldly.

Mr. Featherstone grunted: he could not deny that an ordinary sort of
girl like her might be expected to be useful, so he thought of another
rejoinder, disagreeable enough to be always apropos.  "If Fred Vincy
comes to-morrow, now, don't you keep him chattering: let him come up to
me."



CHAPTER XXVI.

    "He beats me and I rail at him: O worthy satisfaction!
    would it were otherwise--that I could beat him while
    he railed at me.--"
                                    --Troilus and Cressida.


But Fred did not go to Stone Court the next day, for reasons that were
quite peremptory.  From those visits to unsanitary Houndsley streets in
search of Diamond, he had brought back not only a bad bargain in
horse-flesh, but the further misfortune of some ailment which for a day
or two had deemed mere depression and headache, but which got so much
worse when he returned from his visit to Stone Court that, going into
the dining-room, he threw himself on the sofa, and in answer to his
mother's anxious question, said, "I feel very ill: I think you must
send for Wrench."

Wrench came, but did not apprehend anything serious, spoke of a "slight
derangement," and did not speak of coming again on the morrow.  He had
a due value for the Vincys' house, but the wariest men are apt to be
dulled by routine, and on worried mornings will sometimes go through
their business with the zest of the daily bell-ringer.  Mr. Wrench was
a small, neat, bilious man, with a well-dressed wig: he had a laborious
practice, an irascible temper, a lymphatic wife and seven children; and
he was already rather late before setting out on a four-miles drive to
meet Dr. Minchin on the other side of Tipton, the decease of Hicks, a
rural practitioner, having increased Middlemarch practice in that
direction.  Great statesmen err, and why not small medical men?  Mr.
Wrench did not neglect sending the usual white parcels, which this time
had black and drastic contents.  Their effect was not alleviating to
poor Fred, who, however, unwilling as he said to believe that he was
"in for an illness," rose at his usual easy hour the next morning and
went down-stairs meaning to breakfast, but succeeded in nothing but in
sitting and shivering by the fire.  Mr. Wrench was again sent for, but
was gone on his rounds, and Mrs. Vincy seeing her darling's changed
looks and general misery, began to cry and said she would send for Dr.
Sprague.

"Oh, nonsense, mother!  It's nothing," said Fred, putting out his hot
dry hand to her, "I shall soon be all right.  I must have taken cold in
that nasty damp ride."

"Mamma!" said Rosamond, who was seated near the window (the dining-room
windows looked on that highly respectable street called Lowick Gate),
"there is Mr. Lydgate, stopping to speak to some one.  If I were you I
would call him in.  He has cured Ellen Bulstrode.  They say he cures
every one."

Mrs. Vincy sprang to the window and opened it in an instant, thinking
only of Fred and not of medical etiquette.  Lydgate was only two yards
off on the other side of some iron palisading, and turned round at the
sudden sound of the sash, before she called to him.  In two minutes he
was in the room, and Rosamond went out, after waiting just long enough
to show a pretty anxiety conflicting with her sense of what was
becoming.

Lydgate had to hear a narrative in which Mrs. Vincy's mind insisted
with remarkable instinct on every point of minor importance, especially
on what Mr. Wrench had said and had not said about coming again.  That
there might be an awkward affair with Wrench, Lydgate saw at once; but
the case was serious enough to make him dismiss that consideration: he
was convinced that Fred was in the pink-skinned stage of typhoid fever,
and that he had taken just the wrong medicines.  He must go to bed
immediately, must have a regular nurse, and various appliances and
precautions must be used, about which Lydgate was particular.  Poor
Mrs. Vincy's terror at these indications of danger found vent in such
words as came most easily.  She thought it "very ill usage on the part
of Mr. Wrench, who had attended their house so many years in preference
to Mr. Peacock, though Mr. Peacock was equally a friend.  Why Mr.
Wrench should neglect her children more than others, she could not for
the life of her understand.  He had not neglected Mrs. Larcher's when
they had the measles, nor indeed would Mrs. Vincy have wished that he
should.  And if anything should happen--"

Here poor Mrs. Vincy's spirit quite broke down, and her Niobe throat
and good-humored face were sadly convulsed.  This was in the hall out
of Fred's hearing, but Rosamond had opened the drawing-room door, and
now came forward anxiously.  Lydgate apologized for Mr. Wrench, said
that the symptoms yesterday might have been disguising, and that this
form of fever was very equivocal in its beginnings: he would go
immediately to the druggist's and have a prescription made up in order
to lose no time, but he would write to Mr. Wrench and tell him what had
been done.

"But you must come again--you must go on attending Fred.  I can't have
my boy left to anybody who may come or not.  I bear nobody ill-will,
thank God, and Mr. Wrench saved me in the pleurisy, but he'd better
have let me die--if--if--"

"I will meet Mr. Wrench here, then, shall I?" said Lydgate, really
believing that Wrench was not well prepared to deal wisely with a case
of this kind.

"Pray make that arrangement, Mr. Lydgate," said Rosamond, coming to her
mother's aid, and supporting her arm to lead her away.

When Mr. Vincy came home he was very angry with Wrench, and did not
care if he never came into his house again.  Lydgate should go on now,
whether Wrench liked it or not.  It was no joke to have fever in the
house.  Everybody must be sent to now, not to come to dinner on
Thursday.  And Pritchard needn't get up any wine: brandy was the best
thing against infection.  "I shall drink brandy," added Mr. Vincy,
emphatically--as much as to say, this was not an occasion for firing
with blank-cartridges. "He's an uncommonly unfortunate lad, is Fred.
He'd need have--some luck by-and-by to make up for all this--else I
don't know who'd have an eldest son."

"Don't say so, Vincy," said the mother, with a quivering lip, "if you
don't want him to be taken from me."

"It will worret you to death, Lucy; _that_ I can see," said Mr. Vincy,
more mildly.  "However, Wrench shall know what I think of the matter."
(What Mr. Vincy thought confusedly was, that the fever might somehow
have been hindered if Wrench had shown the proper solicitude about
his--the Mayor's--family.) "I'm the last man to give in to the cry
about new doctors, or new parsons either--whether they're Bulstrode's
men or not.  But Wrench shall know what I think, take it as he will."

Wrench did not take it at all well.  Lydgate was as polite as he could
be in his offhand way, but politeness in a man who has placed you at a
disadvantage is only an additional exasperation, especially if he
happens to have been an object of dislike beforehand.  Country
practitioners used to be an irritable species, susceptible on the point
of honor; and Mr. Wrench was one of the most irritable among them.  He
did not refuse to meet Lydgate in the evening, but his temper was
somewhat tried on the occasion.  He had to hear Mrs. Vincy say--

"Oh, Mr. Wrench, what have I ever done that you should use me so?--  To
go away, and never to come again!  And my boy might have been stretched
a corpse!"

Mr. Vincy, who had been keeping up a sharp fire on the enemy Infection,
and was a good deal heated in consequence, started up when he heard
Wrench come in, and went into the hall to let him know what he thought.

"I'll tell you what, Wrench, this is beyond a joke," said the Mayor,
who of late had had to rebuke offenders with an official air, and how
broadened himself by putting his thumbs in his armholes.--  "To let
fever get unawares into a house like this.  There are some things that
ought to be actionable, and are not so-- that's my opinion."

But irrational reproaches were easier to bear than the sense of being
instructed, or rather the sense that a younger man, like Lydgate,
inwardly considered him in need of instruction, for "in point of fact,"
Mr. Wrench afterwards said, Lydgate paraded flighty, foreign notions,
which would not wear.  He swallowed his ire for the moment, but he
afterwards wrote to decline further attendance in the case.  The house
might be a good one, but Mr. Wrench was not going to truckle to anybody
on a professional matter.  He reflected, with much probability on his
side, that Lydgate would by-and-by be caught tripping too, and that his
ungentlemanly attempts to discredit the sale of drugs by his
professional brethren, would by-and-by recoil on himself.  He threw out
biting remarks on Lydgate's tricks, worthy only of a quack, to get
himself a factitious reputation with credulous people.  That cant about
cures was never got up by sound practitioners.

This was a point on which Lydgate smarted as much as Wrench could
desire.  To be puffed by ignorance was not only humiliating, but
perilous, and not more enviable than the reputation of the
weather-prophet.  He was impatient of the foolish expectations amidst
which all work must be carried on, and likely enough to damage himself
as much as Mr. Wrench could wish, by an unprofessional openness.

However, Lydgate was installed as medical attendant on the Vincys, and
the event was a subject of general conversation in Middlemarch.  Some
said, that the Vincys had behaved scandalously, that Mr. Vincy had
threatened Wrench, and that Mrs. Vincy had accused him of poisoning her
son.  Others were of opinion that Mr. Lydgate's passing by was
providential, that he was wonderfully clever in fevers, and that
Bulstrode was in the right to bring him forward.  Many people believed
that Lydgate's coming to the town at all was really due to Bulstrode;
and Mrs. Taft, who was always counting stitches and gathered her
information in misleading fragments caught between the rows of her
knitting, had got it into her head that Mr. Lydgate was a natural son
of Bulstrode's, a fact which seemed to justify her suspicions of
evangelical laymen.

She one day communicated this piece of knowledge to Mrs. Farebrother,
who did not fail to tell her son of it, observing--

"I should not be surprised at anything in Bulstrode, but I should be
sorry to think it of Mr. Lydgate."

"Why, mother," said Mr. Farebrother, after an explosive laugh, "you
know very well that Lydgate is of a good family in the North.  He never
heard of Bulstrode before he came here."

"That is satisfactory so far as Mr. Lydgate is concerned, Camden," said
the old lady, with an air of precision.--"But as to Bulstrode--the
report may be true of some other son."



CHAPTER XXVII.

    Let the high Muse chant loves Olympian:
    We are but mortals, and must sing of man.


An eminent philosopher among my friends, who can dignify even your ugly
furniture by lifting it into the serene light of science, has shown me
this pregnant little fact.  Your pier-glass or extensive surface of
polished steel made to be rubbed by a housemaid, will be minutely and
multitudinously scratched in all directions; but place now against it a
lighted candle as a centre of illumination, and lo! the scratches will
seem to arrange themselves in a fine series of concentric circles round
that little sun.  It is demonstrable that the scratches are going
everywhere impartially and it is only your candle which produces the
flattering illusion of a concentric arrangement, its light falling with
an exclusive optical selection.  These things are a parable.  The
scratches are events, and the candle is the egoism of any person now
absent--of Miss Vincy, for example.  Rosamond had a Providence of her
own who had kindly made her more charming than other girls, and who
seemed to have arranged Fred's illness and Mr. Wrench's mistake in
order to bring her and Lydgate within effective proximity.  It would
have been to contravene these arrangements if Rosamond had consented to
go away to Stone Court or elsewhere, as her parents wished her to do,
especially since Mr. Lydgate thought the precaution needless.
Therefore, while Miss Morgan and the children were sent away to a
farmhouse the morning after Fred's illness had declared itself,
Rosamond refused to leave papa and mamma.

Poor mamma indeed was an object to touch any creature born of woman;
and Mr. Vincy, who doted on his wife, was more alarmed on her account
than on Fred's. But for his insistence she would have taken no rest:
her brightness was all bedimmed; unconscious of her costume which had
always been so fresh and gay, she was like a sick bird with languid eye
and plumage ruffled, her senses dulled to the sights and sounds that
used most to interest her.  Fred's delirium, in which he seemed to be
wandering out of her reach, tore her heart.  After her first outburst
against Mr. Wrench she went about very quietly: her one low cry was to
Lydgate.  She would follow him out of the room and put her hand on his
arm moaning out, "Save my boy."  Once she pleaded, "He has always been
good to me, Mr. Lydgate: he never had a hard word for his mother,"--as
if poor Fred's suffering were an accusation against him.  All the
deepest fibres of the mother's memory were stirred, and the young man
whose voice took a gentler tone when he spoke to her, was one with the
babe whom she had loved, with a love new to her, before he was born.

"I have good hope, Mrs. Vincy," Lydgate would say.  "Come down with me
and let us talk about the food."  In that way he led her to the parlor
where Rosamond was, and made a change for her, surprising her into
taking some tea or broth which had been prepared for her.  There was a
constant understanding between him and Rosamond on these matters.  He
almost always saw her before going to the sickroom, and she appealed to
him as to what she could do for mamma.  Her presence of mind and
adroitness in carrying out his hints were admirable, and it is not
wonderful that the idea of seeing Rosamond began to mingle itself with
his interest in the case.  Especially when the critical stage was
passed, and he began to feel confident of Fred's recovery.  In the more
doubtful time, he had advised calling in Dr. Sprague (who, if he could,
would rather have remained neutral on Wrench's account); but after two
consultations, the conduct of the case was left to Lydgate, and there
was every reason to make him assiduous.  Morning and evening he was at
Mr. Vincy's, and gradually the visits became cheerful as Fred became
simply feeble, and lay not only in need of the utmost petting but
conscious of it, so that Mrs. Vincy felt as if, after all, the illness
had made a festival for her tenderness.

Both father and mother held it an added reason for good spirits, when
old Mr. Featherstone sent messages by Lydgate, saying that Fred must
make haste and get well, as he, Peter Featherstone, could not do
without him, and missed his visits sadly.  The old man himself was
getting bedridden.  Mrs. Vincy told these messages to Fred when he
could listen, and he turned towards her his delicate, pinched face,
from which all the thick blond hair had been cut away, and in which the
eyes seemed to have got larger, yearning for some word about
Mary--wondering what she felt about his illness.  No word passed his
lips; but "to hear with eyes belongs to love's rare wit," and the
mother in the fulness of her heart not only divined Fred's longing, but
felt ready for any sacrifice in order to satisfy him.

"If I can only see my boy strong again," she said, in her loving folly;
"and who knows?--perhaps master of Stone Court! and he can marry
anybody he likes then."

"Not if they won't have me, mother," said Fred.  The illness had made
him childish, and tears came as he spoke.

"Oh, take a bit of jelly, my dear," said Mrs. Vincy, secretly
incredulous of any such refusal.

She never left Fred's side when her husband was not in the house, and
thus Rosamond was in the unusual position of being much alone.
Lydgate, naturally, never thought of staying long with her, yet it
seemed that the brief impersonal conversations they had together were
creating that peculiar intimacy which consists in shyness.  They were
obliged to look at each other in speaking, and somehow the looking
could not be carried through as the matter of course which it really
was.  Lydgate began to feel this sort of consciousness unpleasant and
one day looked down, or anywhere, like an ill-worked puppet.  But this
turned out badly: the next day, Rosamond looked down, and the
consequence was that when their eyes met again, both were more
conscious than before.  There was no help for this in science, and as
Lydgate did not want to flirt, there seemed to be no help for it in
folly.  It was therefore a relief when neighbors no longer considered
the house in quarantine, and when the chances of seeing Rosamond alone
were very much reduced.

But that intimacy of mutual embarrassment, in which each feels that the
other is feeling something, having once existed, its effect is not to
be done away with.  Talk about the weather and other well-bred topics
is apt to seem a hollow device, and behavior can hardly become easy
unless it frankly recognizes a mutual fascination--which of course need
not mean anything deep or serious.  This was the way in which Rosamond
and Lydgate slid gracefully into ease, and made their intercourse
lively again.  Visitors came and went as usual, there was once more
music in the drawing-room, and all the extra hospitality of Mr. Vincy's
mayoralty returned.  Lydgate, whenever he could, took his seat by
Rosamond's side, and lingered to hear her music, calling himself her
captive--meaning, all the while, not to be her captive.  The
preposterousness of the notion that he could at once set up a
satisfactory establishment as a married man was a sufficient guarantee
against danger.  This play at being a little in love was agreeable, and
did not interfere with graver pursuits.  Flirtation, after all, was not
necessarily a singeing process.  Rosamond, for her part, had never
enjoyed the days so much in her life before: she was sure of being
admired by some one worth captivating, and she did not distinguish
flirtation from love, either in herself or in another.  She seemed to
be sailing with a fair wind just whither she would go, and her thoughts
were much occupied with a handsome house in Lowick Gate which she hoped
would by-and-by be vacant.  She was quite determined, when she was
married, to rid herself adroitly of all the visitors who were not
agreeable to her at her father's; and she imagined the drawing-room in
her favorite house with various styles of furniture.

Certainly her thoughts were much occupied with Lydgate himself; he
seemed to her almost perfect: if he had known his notes so that his
enchantment under her music had been less like an emotional elephant's,
and if he had been able to discriminate better the refinements of her
taste in dress, she could hardly have mentioned a deficiency in him.
How different he was from young Plymdale or Mr. Caius Larcher!  Those
young men had not a notion of French, and could speak on no subject
with striking knowledge, except perhaps the dyeing and carrying trades,
which of course they were ashamed to mention; they were Middlemarch
gentry, elated with their silver-headed whips and satin stocks, but
embarrassed in their manners, and timidly jocose: even Fred was above
them, having at least the accent and manner of a university man.
Whereas Lydgate was always listened to, bore himself with the careless
politeness of conscious superiority, and seemed to have the right
clothes on by a certain natural affinity, without ever having to think
about them.  Rosamond was proud when he entered the room, and when he
approached her with a distinguishing smile, she had a delicious sense
that she was the object of enviable homage.  If Lydgate had been aware
of all the pride he excited in that delicate bosom, he might have been
just as well pleased as any other man, even the most densely ignorant
of humoral pathology or fibrous tissue: he held it one of the prettiest
attitudes of the feminine mind to adore a man's pre-eminence without
too precise a knowledge of what it consisted in.  But Rosamond was not
one of those helpless girls who betray themselves unawares, and whose
behavior is awkwardly driven by their impulses, instead of being
steered by wary grace and propriety.  Do you imagine that her rapid
forecast and rumination concerning house-furniture and society were
ever discernible in her conversation, even with her mamma?  On the
contrary, she would have expressed the prettiest surprise and
disapprobation if she had heard that another young lady had been
detected in that immodest prematureness--indeed, would probably have
disbelieved in its possibility.  For Rosamond never showed any
unbecoming knowledge, and was always that combination of correct
sentiments, music, dancing, drawing, elegant note-writing, private
album for extracted verse, and perfect blond loveliness, which made the
irresistible woman for the doomed man of that date.  Think no unfair
evil of her, pray: she had no wicked plots, nothing sordid or
mercenary; in fact, she never thought of money except as something
necessary which other people would always provide.  She was not in the
habit of devising falsehoods, and if her statements were no direct clew
to fact, why, they were not intended in that light--they were among
her elegant accomplishments, intended to please.  Nature had inspired
many arts in finishing Mrs. Lemon's favorite pupil, who by general
consent (Fred's excepted) was a rare compound of beauty, cleverness,
and amiability.

Lydgate found it more and more agreeable to be with her, and there was
no constraint now, there was a delightful interchange of influence in
their eyes, and what they said had that superfluity of meaning for
them, which is observable with some sense of flatness by a third
person; still they had no interviews or asides from which a third
person need have been excluded.  In fact, they flirted; and Lydgate was
secure in the belief that they did nothing else.  If a man could not
love and be wise, surely he could flirt and be wise at the same time?
Really, the men in Middlemarch, except Mr. Farebrother, were great
bores, and Lydgate did not care about commercial politics or cards:
what was he to do for relaxation?  He was often invited to the
Bulstrodes'; but the girls there were hardly out of the schoolroom; and
Mrs. Bulstrode's _naive_ way of conciliating piety and worldliness, the
nothingness of this life and the desirability of cut glass, the
consciousness at once of filthy rags and the best damask, was not a
sufficient relief from the weight of her husband's invariable
seriousness.  The Vincys' house, with all its faults, was the
pleasanter by contrast; besides, it nourished Rosamond--sweet to look
at as a half-opened blush-rose, and adorned with accomplishments for
the refined amusement of man.

But he made some enemies, other than medical, by his success with Miss
Vincy.  One evening he came into the drawing-room rather late, when
several other visitors were there.  The card-table had drawn off the
elders, and Mr. Ned Plymdale (one of the good matches in Middlemarch,
though not one of its leading minds) was in tete-a-tete with Rosamond.
He had brought the last "Keepsake," the gorgeous watered-silk
publication which marked modern progress at that time; and he
considered himself very fortunate that he could be the first to look
over it with her, dwelling on the ladies and gentlemen with shiny
copper-plate cheeks and copper-plate smiles, and pointing to comic
verses as capital and sentimental stories as interesting.  Rosamond was
gracious, and Mr. Ned was satisfied that he had the very best thing in
art and literature as a medium for "paying addresses"--the very thing
to please a nice girl.  He had also reasons, deep rather than
ostensible, for being satisfied with his own appearance.  To
superficial observers his chin had too vanishing an aspect, looking as
if it were being gradually reabsorbed.  And it did indeed cause him
some difficulty about the fit of his satin stocks, for which chins were
at that time useful.

"I think the Honorable Mrs. S. is something like you," said Mr. Ned.
He kept the book open at the bewitching portrait, and looked at it
rather languishingly.

"Her back is very large; she seems to have sat for that," said
Rosamond, not meaning any satire, but thinking how red young Plymdale's
hands were, and wondering why Lydgate did not come.  She went on with
her tatting all the while.

"I did not say she was as beautiful as you are," said Mr. Ned,
venturing to look from the portrait to its rival.

"I suspect you of being an adroit flatterer," said Rosamond, feeling
sure that she should have to reject this young gentleman a second time.

But now Lydgate came in; the book was closed before he reached
Rosamond's corner, and as he took his seat with easy confidence on the
other side of her, young Plymdale's jaw fell like a barometer towards
the cheerless side of change.  Rosamond enjoyed not only Lydgate's
presence but its effect: she liked to excite jealousy.

"What a late comer you are!" she said, as they shook hands.  "Mamma had
given you up a little while ago.  How do you find Fred?"

"As usual; going on well, but slowly.  I want him to go away--to Stone
Court, for example.  But your mamma seems to have some objection."

"Poor fellow!" said Rosamond, prettily.  "You will see Fred so
changed," she added, turning to the other suitor; "we have looked to
Mr. Lydgate as our guardian angel during this illness."

Mr. Ned smiled nervously, while Lydgate, drawing the "Keepsake" towards
him and opening it, gave a short scornful laugh and tossed up his
chin, as if in wonderment at human folly.

"What are you laughing at so profanely?" said Rosamond, with bland
neutrality.

"I wonder which would turn out to be the silliest--the engravings or
the writing here," said Lydgate, in his most convinced tone, while he
turned over the pages quickly, seeming to see all through the book in
no time, and showing his large white hands to much advantage, as
Rosamond thought.  "Do look at this bridegroom coming out of church:
did you ever see such a 'sugared invention'--as the Elizabethans used
to say?  Did any haberdasher ever look so smirking?  Yet I will answer
for it the story makes him one of the first gentlemen in the land."

"You are so severe, I am frightened at you," said Rosamond, keeping her
amusement duly moderate.  Poor young Plymdale had lingered with
admiration over this very engraving, and his spirit was stirred.

"There are a great many celebrated people writing in the 'Keepsake,' at
all events," he said, in a tone at once piqued and timid.  "This is the
first time I have heard it called silly."

"I think I shall turn round on you and accuse you of being a Goth,"
said Rosamond, looking at Lydgate with a smile.  "I suspect you know
nothing about Lady Blessington and L. E. L." Rosamond herself was not
without relish for these writers, but she did not readily commit
herself by admiration, and was alive to the slightest hint that
anything was not, according to Lydgate, in the very highest taste.

"But Sir Walter Scott--I suppose Mr. Lydgate knows him," said young
Plymdale, a little cheered by this advantage.

"Oh, I read no literature now," said Lydgate, shutting the book, and
pushing it away.  "I read so much when I was a lad, that I suppose it
will last me all my life.  I used to know Scott's poems by heart."

"I should like to know when you left off," said Rosamond, "because then
I might be sure that I knew something which you did not know."

"Mr. Lydgate would say that was not worth knowing," said Mr. Ned,
purposely caustic.

"On the contrary," said Lydgate, showing no smart; but smiling with
exasperating confidence at Rosamond.  "It would be worth knowing by the
fact that Miss Vincy could tell it me."

Young Plymdale soon went to look at the whist-playing, thinking that
Lydgate was one of the most conceited, unpleasant fellows it had ever
been his ill-fortune to meet.

"How rash you are!" said Rosamond, inwardly delighted.  "Do you see
that you have given offence?"

"What! is it Mr. Plymdale's book?  I am sorry.  I didn't think about
it."

"I shall begin to admit what you said of yourself when you first came
here--that you are a bear, and want teaching by the birds."

"Well, there is a bird who can teach me what she will.  Don't I listen
to her willingly?"

To Rosamond it seemed as if she and Lydgate were as good as engaged.
That they were some time to be engaged had long been an idea in her
mind; and ideas, we know, tend to a more solid kind of existence, the
necessary materials being at hand.  It is true, Lydgate had the
counter-idea of remaining unengaged; but this was a mere negative, a
shadow cast by other resolves which themselves were capable of
shrinking.  Circumstance was almost sure to be on the side of
Rosamond's idea, which had a shaping activity and looked through
watchful blue eyes, whereas Lydgate's lay blind and unconcerned as a
jelly-fish which gets melted without knowing it.

That evening when he went home, he looked at his phials to see how a
process of maceration was going on, with undisturbed interest; and he
wrote out his daily notes with as much precision as usual.  The
reveries from which it was difficult for him to detach himself were
ideal constructions of something else than Rosamond's virtues, and the
primitive tissue was still his fair unknown.  Moreover, he was
beginning to feel some zest for the growing though half-suppressed feud
between him and the other medical men, which was likely to become more
manifest, now that Bulstrode's method of managing the new hospital was
about to be declared; and there were various inspiriting signs that his
non-acceptance by some of Peacock's patients might be counterbalanced
by the impression he had produced in other quarters.  Only a few days
later, when he had happened to overtake Rosamond on the Lowick road and
had got down from his horse to walk by her side until he had quite
protected her from a passing drove, he had been stopped by a servant on
horseback with a message calling him in to a house of some importance
where Peacock had never attended; and it was the second instance of
this kind.  The servant was Sir James Chettam's, and the house was
Lowick Manor.



CHAPTER XXVIII.

    1st Gent.  All times are good to seek your wedded home
                   Bringing a mutual delight.

    2d Gent.                          Why, true.
                   The calendar hath not an evil day
                   For souls made one by love, and even death
                   Were sweetness, if it came like rolling waves
                   While they two clasped each other, and foresaw
                   No life apart.


Mr. and Mrs. Casaubon, returning from their wedding journey, arrived at
Lowick Manor in the middle of January.  A light snow was falling as
they descended at the door, and in the morning, when Dorothea passed
from her dressing-room avenue the blue-green boudoir that we know of,
she saw the long avenue of limes lifting their trunks from a white
earth, and spreading white branches against the dun and motionless sky.
The distant flat shrank in uniform whiteness and low-hanging uniformity
of cloud.  The very furniture in the room seemed to have shrunk since
she saw it before: the stag in the tapestry looked more like a ghost in
his ghostly blue-green world; the volumes of polite literature in the
bookcase looked more like immovable imitations of books.  The bright
fire of dry oak-boughs burning on the logs seemed an incongruous
renewal of life and glow--like the figure of Dorothea herself as she
entered carrying the red-leather cases containing the cameos for Celia.

She was glowing from her morning toilet as only healthful youth can
glow: there was gem-like brightness on her coiled hair and in her hazel
eyes; there was warm red life in her lips; her throat had a breathing
whiteness above the differing white of the fur which itself seemed to
wind about her neck and cling down her blue-gray pelisse with a
tenderness gathered from her own, a sentient commingled innocence which
kept its loveliness against the crystalline purity of the outdoor snow.
As she laid the cameo-cases on the table in the bow-window, she
unconsciously kept her hands on them, immediately absorbed in looking
out on the still, white enclosure which made her visible world.

Mr. Casaubon, who had risen early complaining of palpitation, was in
the library giving audience to his curate Mr. Tucker.  By-and-by Celia
would come in her quality of bridesmaid as well as sister, and through
the next weeks there would be wedding visits received and given; all in
continuance of that transitional life understood to correspond with the
excitement of bridal felicity, and keeping up the sense of busy
ineffectiveness, as of a dream which the dreamer begins to suspect.
The duties of her married life, contemplated as so great beforehand,
seemed to be shrinking with the furniture and the white vapor-walled
landscape.  The clear heights where she expected to walk in full
communion had become difficult to see even in her imagination; the
delicious repose of the soul on a complete superior had been shaken
into uneasy effort and alarmed with dim presentiment.  When would the
days begin of that active wifely devotion which was to strengthen her
husband's life and exalt her own?  Never perhaps, as she had
preconceived them; but somehow--still somehow.  In this solemnly
pledged union of her life, duty would present itself in some new form
of inspiration and give a new meaning to wifely love.

Meanwhile there was the snow and the low arch of dun vapor--there was
the stifling oppression of that gentlewoman's world, where everything
was done for her and none asked for her aid--where the sense of
connection with a manifold pregnant existence had to be kept up
painfully as an inward vision, instead of coming from without in claims
that would have shaped her energies.--  "What shall I do?"  "Whatever you
please, my dear:" that had been her brief history since she had left
off learning morning lessons and practising silly rhythms on the hated
piano.  Marriage, which was to bring guidance into worthy and
imperative occupation, had not yet freed her from the gentlewoman's
oppressive liberty: it had not even filled her leisure with the
ruminant joy of unchecked tenderness.  Her blooming full-pulsed youth
stood there in a moral imprisonment which made itself one with the
chill, colorless, narrowed landscape, with the shrunken furniture, the
never-read books, and the ghostly stag in a pale fantastic world that
seemed to be vanishing from the daylight.

In the first minutes when Dorothea looked out she felt nothing but the
dreary oppression; then came a keen remembrance, and turning away from
the window she walked round the room.  The ideas and hopes which were
living in her mind when she first saw this room nearly three months
before were present now only as memories: she judged them as we judge
transient and departed things.  All existence seemed to beat with a
lower pulse than her own, and her religious faith was a solitary cry,
the struggle out of a nightmare in which every object was withering and
shrinking away from her.  Each remembered thing in the room was
disenchanted, was deadened as an unlit transparency, till her wandering
gaze came to the group of miniatures, and there at last she saw
something which had gathered new breath and meaning: it was the
miniature of Mr. Casaubon's aunt Julia, who had made the unfortunate
marriage--of Will Ladislaw's grandmother.  Dorothea could fancy that
it was alive now--the delicate woman's face which yet had a headstrong
look, a peculiarity difficult to interpret.  Was it only her friends
who thought her marriage unfortunate? or did she herself find it out to
be a mistake, and taste the salt bitterness of her tears in the
merciful silence of the night?  What breadths of experience Dorothea
seemed to have passed over since she first looked at this miniature!
She felt a new companionship with it, as if it had an ear for her and
could see how she was looking at it.  Here was a woman who had known
some difficulty about marriage.  Nay, the colors deepened, the lips and
chin seemed to get larger, the hair and eyes seemed to be sending out
light, the face was masculine and beamed on her with that full gaze
which tells her on whom it falls that she is too interesting for the
slightest movement of her eyelid to pass unnoticed and uninterpreted.
The vivid presentation came like a pleasant glow to Dorothea: she felt
herself smiling, and turning from the miniature sat down and looked up
as if she were again talking to a figure in front of her.  But the
smile disappeared as she went on meditating, and at last she said
aloud--

"Oh, it was cruel to speak so!  How sad--how dreadful!"

She rose quickly and went out of the room, hurrying along the corridor,
with the irresistible impulse to go and see her husband and inquire if
she could do anything for him.  Perhaps Mr. Tucker was gone and Mr.
Casaubon was alone in the library.  She felt as if all her morning's
gloom would vanish if she could see her husband glad because of her
presence.

But when she reached the head of the dark oak there was Celia coming
up, and below there was Mr. Brooke, exchanging welcomes and
congratulations with Mr. Casaubon.

"Dodo!" said Celia, in her quiet staccato; then kissed her sister,
whose arms encircled her, and said no more.  I think they both cried a
little in a furtive manner, while Dorothea ran down-stairs to greet her
uncle.

"I need not ask how you are, my dear," said Mr. Brooke, after kissing
her forehead.  "Rome has agreed with you, I see--happiness, frescos,
the antique--that sort of thing.  Well, it's very pleasant to have you
back again, and you understand all about art now, eh?  But Casaubon is
a little pale, I tell him--a little pale, you know.  Studying hard in
his holidays is carrying it rather too far.  I overdid it at one
time"--Mr. Brooke still held Dorothea's hand, but had turned his face
to Mr. Casaubon--"about topography, ruins, temples--I thought I had a
clew, but I saw it would carry me too far, and nothing might come of
it.  You may go any length in that sort of thing, and nothing may come
of it, you know."

Dorothea's eyes also were turned up to her husband's face with some
anxiety at the idea that those who saw him afresh after absence might
be aware of signs which she had not noticed.

"Nothing to alarm you, my dear," said Mr. Brooke, observing her
expression.  "A little English beef and mutton will soon make a
difference.  It was all very well to look pale, sitting for the
portrait of Aquinas, you know--we got your letter just in time.  But
Aquinas, now--he was a little too subtle, wasn't he?  Does anybody read
Aquinas?"

"He is not indeed an author adapted to superficial minds," said Mr.
Casaubon, meeting these timely questions with dignified patience.

"You would like coffee in your own room, uncle?" said Dorothea, coming
to the rescue.

"Yes; and you must go to Celia: she has great news to tell you, you
know.  I leave it all to her."

The blue-green boudoir looked much more cheerful when Celia was seated
there in a pelisse exactly like her sister's, surveying the cameos with
a placid satisfaction, while the conversation passed on to other topics.

"Do you think it nice to go to Rome on a wedding journey?" said Celia,
with her ready delicate blush which Dorothea was used to on the
smallest occasions.

"It would not suit all--not you, dear, for example," said Dorothea,
quietly.  No one would ever know what she thought of a wedding journey
to Rome.

"Mrs. Cadwallader says it is nonsense, people going a long journey when
they are married.  She says they get tired to death of each other, and
can't quarrel comfortably, as they would at home.  And Lady Chettam
says she went to Bath."  Celia's color changed again and again--seemed

    "To come and go with tidings from the heart,
     As it a running messenger had been."

It must mean more than Celia's blushing usually did.

"Celia! has something happened?" said Dorothea, in a tone full of
sisterly feeling.  "Have you really any great news to tell me?"

"It was because you went away, Dodo.  Then there was nobody but me for
Sir James to talk to," said Celia, with a certain roguishness in her
eyes.

"I understand.  It is as I used to hope and believe," said Dorothea,
taking her sister's face between her hands, and looking at her half
anxiously.  Celia's marriage seemed more serious than it used to do.

"It was only three days ago," said Celia.  "And Lady Chettam is very
kind."

"And you are very happy?"

"Yes.  We are not going to be married yet.  Because every thing is to
be got ready.  And I don't want to be married so very soon, because I
think it is nice to be engaged.  And we shall be married all our lives
after."

"I do believe you could not marry better, Kitty.  Sir James is a good,
honorable man," said Dorothea, warmly.

"He has gone on with the cottages, Dodo.  He will tell you about them
when he comes.  Shall you be glad to see him?"

"Of course I shall.  How can you ask me?"

"Only I was afraid you would be getting so learned," said Celia,
regarding Mr. Casaubon's learning as a kind of damp which might in due
time saturate a neighboring body.



CHAPTER XXIX.

    "I found that no genius in another could please me.  My
    unfortunate paradoxes had entirely dried up that source of
    comfort."--GOLDSMITH.


One morning, some weeks after her arrival at Lowick, Dorothea--but why
always Dorothea?  Was her point of view the only possible one with
regard to this marriage?  I protest against all our interest, all our
effort at understanding being given to the young skins that look
blooming in spite of trouble; for these too will get faded, and will
know the older and more eating griefs which we are helping to neglect.
In spite of the blinking eyes and white moles objectionable to Celia,
and the want of muscular curve which was morally painful to Sir James,
Mr. Casaubon had an intense consciousness within him, and was
spiritually a-hungered like the rest of us.  He had done nothing
exceptional in marrying--nothing but what society sanctions, and
considers an occasion for wreaths and bouquets.  It had occurred to him
that he must not any longer defer his intention of matrimony, and he
had reflected that in taking a wife, a man of good position should
expect and carefully choose a blooming young lady--the younger the
better, because more educable and submissive--of a rank equal to his
own, of religious principles, virtuous disposition, and good
understanding.  On such a young lady he would make handsome
settlements, and he would neglect no arrangement for her happiness: in
return, he should receive family pleasures and leave behind him that
copy of himself which seemed so urgently required of a man--to the
sonneteers of the sixteenth century.  Times had altered since then, and
no sonneteer had insisted on Mr. Casaubon's leaving a copy of himself;
moreover, he had not yet succeeded in issuing copies of his
mythological key; but he had always intended to acquit himself by
marriage, and the sense that he was fast leaving the years behind him,
that the world was getting dimmer and that he felt lonely, was a reason
to him for losing no more time in overtaking domestic delights before
they too were left behind by the years.

And when he had seen Dorothea he believed that he had found even more
than he demanded: she might really be such a helpmate to him as would
enable him to dispense with a hired secretary, an aid which Mr.
Casaubon had never yet employed and had a suspicious dread of.  (Mr.
Casaubon was nervously conscious that he was expected to manifest a
powerful mind.)  Providence, in its kindness, had supplied him with the
wife he needed.  A wife, a modest young lady, with the purely
appreciative, unambitious abilities of her sex, is sure to think her
husband's mind powerful.  Whether Providence had taken equal care of
Miss Brooke in presenting her with Mr. Casaubon was an idea which could
hardly occur to him.  Society never made the preposterous demand that a
man should think as much about his own qualifications for making a
charming girl happy as he thinks of hers for making himself happy.  As
if a man could choose not only his wife but his wife's husband!  Or as
if he were bound to provide charms for his posterity in his own
person!--  When Dorothea accepted him with effusion, that was only
natural; and Mr. Casaubon believed that his happiness was going to
begin.

He had not had much foretaste of happiness in his previous life.  To
know intense joy without a strong bodily frame, one must have an
enthusiastic soul.  Mr. Casaubon had never had a strong bodily frame,
and his soul was sensitive without being enthusiastic: it was too
languid to thrill out of self-consciousness into passionate delight; it
went on fluttering in the swampy ground where it was hatched, thinking
of its wings and never flying.  His experience was of that pitiable
kind which shrinks from pity, and fears most of all that it should be
known: it was that proud narrow sensitiveness which has not mass enough
to spare for transformation into sympathy, and quivers thread-like in
small currents of self-preoccupation or at best of an egoistic
scrupulosity.  And Mr. Casaubon had many scruples: he was capable of a
severe self-restraint; he was resolute in being a man of honor
according to the code; he would be unimpeachable by any recognized
opinion.  In conduct these ends had been attained; but the difficulty
of making his Key to all Mythologies unimpeachable weighed like lead
upon his mind; and the pamphlets--or "Parerga" as he called them--by
which he tested his public and deposited small monumental records of
his march, were far from having been seen in all their significance.
He suspected the Archdeacon of not having read them; he was in painful
doubt as to what was really thought of them by the leading minds of
Brasenose, and bitterly convinced that his old acquaintance Carp had
been the writer of that depreciatory recension which was kept locked in
a small drawer of Mr. Casaubon's desk, and also in a dark closet of his
verbal memory.  These were heavy impressions to struggle against, and
brought that melancholy embitterment which is the consequence of all
excessive claim: even his religious faith wavered with his wavering
trust in his own authorship, and the consolations of the Christian hope
in immortality seemed to lean on the immortality of the still unwritten
Key to all Mythologies.  For my part I am very sorry for him.  It is an
uneasy lot at best, to be what we call highly taught and yet not to
enjoy: to be present at this great spectacle of life and never to be
liberated from a small hungry shivering self--never to be fully
possessed by the glory we behold, never to have our consciousness
rapturously transformed into the vividness of a thought, the ardor of a
passion, the energy of an action, but always to be scholarly and
uninspired, ambitious and timid, scrupulous and dim-sighted. Becoming a
dean or even a bishop would make little difference, I fear, to Mr.
Casaubon's uneasiness.  Doubtless some ancient Greek has observed that
behind the big mask and the speaking-trumpet, there must always be our
poor little eyes peeping as usual and our timorous lips more or less
under anxious control.

To this mental estate mapped out a quarter of a century before, to
sensibilities thus fenced in, Mr. Casaubon had thought of annexing
happiness with a lovely young bride; but even before marriage, as we
have seen, he found himself under a new depression in the consciousness
that the new bliss was not blissful to him.  Inclination yearned back
to its old, easier custom.  And the deeper he went in domesticity the
more did the sense of acquitting himself and acting with propriety
predominate over any other satisfaction.  Marriage, like religion and
erudition, nay, like authorship itself, was fated to become an outward
requirement, and Edward Casaubon was bent on fulfilling unimpeachably
all requirements.  Even drawing Dorothea into use in his study,
according to his own intention before marriage, was an effort which he
was always tempted to defer, and but for her pleading insistence it
might never have begun.  But she had succeeded in making it a matter of
course that she should take her place at an early hour in the library
and have work either of reading aloud or copying assigned her.  The
work had been easier to define because Mr. Casaubon had adopted an
immediate intention: there was to be a new Parergon, a small monograph
on some lately traced indications concerning the Egyptian mysteries
whereby certain assertions of Warburton's could be corrected.
References were extensive even here, but not altogether shoreless; and
sentences were actually to be written in the shape wherein they would
be scanned by Brasenose and a less formidable posterity.  These minor
monumental productions were always exciting to Mr. Casaubon; digestion
was made difficult by the interference of citations, or by the rivalry
of dialectical phrases ringing against each other in his brain.  And
from the first there was to be a Latin dedication about which
everything was uncertain except that it was not to be addressed to
Carp: it was a poisonous regret to Mr. Casaubon that he had once
addressed a dedication to Carp in which he had numbered that member of
the animal kingdom among the viros nullo aevo perituros, a mistake
which would infallibly lay the dedicator open to ridicule in the next
age, and might even be chuckled over by Pike and Tench in the present.

Thus Mr. Casaubon was in one of his busiest epochs, and as I began to
say a little while ago, Dorothea joined him early in the library where
he had breakfasted alone.  Celia at this time was on a second visit to
Lowick, probably the last before her marriage, and was in the
drawing-room expecting Sir James.

Dorothea had learned to read the signs of her husband's mood, and she
saw that the morning had become more foggy there during the last hour.
She was going silently to her desk when he said, in that distant tone
which implied that he was discharging a disagreeable duty--

"Dorothea, here is a letter for you, which was enclosed in one
addressed to me."

It was a letter of two pages, and she immediately looked at the
signature.

"Mr. Ladislaw!  What can he have to say to me?" she exclaimed, in a
tone of pleased surprise.  "But," she added, looking at Mr. Casaubon,
"I can imagine what he has written to you about."

"You can, if you please, read the letter," said Mr. Casaubon, severely
pointing to it with his pen, and not looking at her.  "But I may as
well say beforehand, that I must decline the proposal it contains to
pay a visit here.  I trust I may be excused for desiring an interval of
complete freedom from such distractions as have been hitherto
inevitable, and especially from guests whose desultory vivacity makes
their presence a fatigue."

There had been no clashing of temper between Dorothea and her husband
since that little explosion in Rome, which had left such strong traces
in her mind that it had been easier ever since to quell emotion than to
incur the consequence of venting it.  But this ill-tempered
anticipation that she could desire visits which might be disagreeable
to her husband, this gratuitous defence of himself against selfish
complaint on her part, was too sharp a sting to be meditated on until
after it had been resented.  Dorothea had thought that she could have
been patient with John Milton, but she had never imagined him behaving
in this way; and for a moment Mr. Casaubon seemed to be stupidly
undiscerning and odiously unjust.  Pity, that "new-born babe" which was
by-and-by to rule many a storm within her, did not "stride the blast"
on this occasion.  With her first words, uttered in a tone that shook
him, she startled Mr. Casaubon into looking at her, and meeting the
flash of her eyes.

"Why do you attribute to me a wish for anything that would annoy you?
You speak to me as if I were something you had to contend against.
Wait at least till I appear to consult my own pleasure apart from
yours."

"Dorothea, you are hasty," answered Mr. Casaubon, nervously.

Decidedly, this woman was too young to be on the formidable level of
wifehood--unless she had been pale and featureless and taken
everything for granted.

"I think it was you who were first hasty in your false suppositions
about my feeling," said Dorothea, in the same tone.  The fire was not
dissipated yet, and she thought it was ignoble in her husband not to
apologize to her.

"We will, if you please, say no more on this subject, Dorothea.  I have
neither leisure nor energy for this kind of debate."

Here Mr. Casaubon dipped his pen and made as if he would return to his
writing, though his hand trembled so much that the words seemed to be
written in an unknown character.  There are answers which, in turning
away wrath, only send it to the other end of the room, and to have a
discussion coolly waived when you feel that justice is all on your own
side is even more exasperating in marriage than in philosophy.

Dorothea left Ladislaw's two letters unread on her husband's
writing-table and went to her own place, the scorn and indignation
within her rejecting the reading of these letters, just as we hurl away
any trash towards which we seem to have been suspected of mean
cupidity.  She did not in the least divine the subtle sources of her
husband's bad temper about these letters: she only knew that they had
caused him to offend her.  She began to work at once, and her hand did
not tremble; on the contrary, in writing out the quotations which had
been given to her the day before, she felt that she was forming her
letters beautifully, and it seemed to her that she saw the construction
of the Latin she was copying, and which she was beginning to
understand, more clearly than usual.  In her indignation there was a
sense of superiority, but it went out for the present in firmness of
stroke, and did not compress itself into an inward articulate voice
pronouncing the once "affable archangel" a poor creature.

There had been this apparent quiet for half an hour, and Dorothea had
not looked away from her own table, when she heard the loud bang of a
book on the floor, and turning quickly saw Mr. Casaubon on the library
steps clinging forward as if he were in some bodily distress.  She
started up and bounded towards him in an instant: he was evidently in
great straits for breath.  Jumping on a stool she got close to his
elbow and said with her whole soul melted into tender alarm--

"Can you lean on me, dear?"

He was still for two or three minutes, which seemed endless to her,
unable to speak or move, gasping for breath.  When at last he descended
the three steps and fell backward in the large chair which Dorothea had
drawn close to the foot of the ladder, he no longer gasped but seemed
helpless and about to faint.  Dorothea rang the bell violently, and
presently Mr. Casaubon was helped to the couch: he did not faint, and
was gradually reviving, when Sir James Chettam came in, having been met
in the hall with the news that Mr. Casaubon had "had a fit in the
library."

"Good God! this is just what might have been expected," was his
immediate thought.  If his prophetic soul had been urged to
particularize, it seemed to him that "fits" would have been the
definite expression alighted upon.  He asked his informant, the butler,
whether the doctor had been sent for.  The butler never knew his master
to want the doctor before; but would it not be right to send for a
physician?

When Sir James entered the library, however, Mr. Casaubon could make
some signs of his usual politeness, and Dorothea, who in the reaction
from her first terror had been kneeling and sobbing by his side now
rose and herself proposed that some one should ride off for a medical
man.

"I recommend you to send for Lydgate," said Sir James.  "My mother has
called him in, and she has found him uncommonly clever.  She has had a
poor opinion of the physicians since my father's death."

Dorothea appealed to her husband, and he made a silent sign of
approval.  So Mr. Lydgate was sent for and he came wonderfully soon,
for the messenger, who was Sir James Chettam's man and knew Mr.
Lydgate, met him leading his horse along the Lowick road and giving his
arm to Miss Vincy.

Celia, in the drawing-room, had known nothing of the trouble till Sir
James told her of it.  After Dorothea's account, he no longer
considered the illness a fit, but still something "of that nature."

"Poor dear Dodo--how dreadful!" said Celia, feeling as much grieved as
her own perfect happiness would allow.  Her little hands were clasped,
and enclosed by Sir James's as a bud is enfolded by a liberal calyx.
"It is very shocking that Mr. Casaubon should be ill; but I never did
like him.  And I think he is not half fond enough of Dorothea; and he
ought to be, for I am sure no one else would have had him--do you
think they would?"

"I always thought it a horrible sacrifice of your sister," said Sir
James.

"Yes.  But poor Dodo never did do what other people do, and I think she
never will."

"She is a noble creature," said the loyal-hearted Sir James.  He had
just had a fresh impression of this kind, as he had seen Dorothea
stretching her tender arm under her husband's neck and looking at him
with unspeakable sorrow.  He did not know how much penitence there was
in the sorrow.

"Yes," said Celia, thinking it was very well for Sir James to say so,
but _he_ would not have been comfortable with Dodo.  "Shall I go to
her?  Could I help her, do you think?"

"I think it would be well for you just to go and see her before Lydgate
comes," said Sir James, magnanimously.  "Only don't stay long."

While Celia was gone he walked up and down remembering what he had
originally felt about Dorothea's engagement, and feeling a revival of
his disgust at Mr. Brooke's indifference.  If Cadwallader--if every
one else had regarded the affair as he, Sir James, had done, the
marriage might have been hindered.  It was wicked to let a young girl
blindly decide her fate in that way, without any effort to save her.
Sir James had long ceased to have any regrets on his own account: his
heart was satisfied with his engagement to Celia.  But he had a
chivalrous nature (was not the disinterested service of woman among the
ideal glories of old chivalry?): his disregarded love had not turned to
bitterness; its death had made sweet odors--floating memories that
clung with a consecrating effect to Dorothea.  He could remain her
brotherly friend, interpreting her actions with generous trustfulness.



CHAPTER XXX.

    "Qui veut delasser hors de propos, lasse."--PASCAL.


Mr. Casaubon had no second attack of equal severity with the first, and
in a few days began to recover his usual condition.  But Lydgate seemed
to think the case worth a great deal of attention.  He not only used
his stethoscope (which had not become a matter of course in practice at
that time), but sat quietly by his patient and watched him.  To Mr.
Casaubon's questions about himself, he replied that the source of the
illness was the common error of intellectual men--a too eager and
monotonous application: the remedy was, to be satisfied with moderate
work, and to seek variety of relaxation.  Mr. Brooke, who sat by on one
occasion, suggested that Mr. Casaubon should go fishing, as Cadwallader
did, and have a turning-room, make toys, table-legs, and that kind of
thing.

"In short, you recommend me to anticipate the arrival of my second
childhood," said poor Mr. Casaubon, with some bitterness.  "These
things," he added, looking at Lydgate, "would be to me such relaxation
as tow-picking is to prisoners in a house of correction."

"I confess," said Lydgate, smiling, "amusement is rather an
unsatisfactory prescription.  It is something like telling people to
keep up their spirits.  Perhaps I had better say, that you must submit
to be mildly bored rather than to go on working."

"Yes, yes," said Mr. Brooke.  "Get Dorothea to play backgammon with you
in the evenings.  And shuttlecock, now--I don't know a finer game than
shuttlecock for the daytime.  I remember it all the fashion.  To be
sure, your eyes might not stand that, Casaubon.  But you must unbend,
you know.  Why, you might take to some light study: conchology, now: I
always think that must be a light study.  Or get Dorothea to read you
light things, Smollett--'Roderick Random,' 'Humphrey Clinker:'  they
are a little broad, but she may read anything now she's married, you
know.  I remember they made me laugh uncommonly--there's a droll bit
about a postilion's breeches.  We have no such humor now.  I have gone
through all these things, but they might be rather new to you."

"As new as eating thistles," would have been an answer to represent Mr.
Casaubon's feelings.  But he only bowed resignedly, with due respect to
his wife's uncle, and observed that doubtless the works he mentioned
had "served as a resource to a certain order of minds."

"You see," said the able magistrate to Lydgate, when they were outside
the door, "Casaubon has been a little narrow: it leaves him rather at a
loss when you forbid him his particular work, which I believe is
something very deep indeed--in the line of research, you know.  I would
never give way to that; I was always versatile.  But a clergyman is
tied a little tight.  If they would make him a bishop, now!--he did a
very good pamphlet for Peel.  He would have more movement then, more
show; he might get a little flesh.  But I recommend you to talk to Mrs.
Casaubon.  She is clever enough for anything, is my niece.  Tell her,
her husband wants liveliness, diversion: put her on amusing tactics."

Without Mr. Brooke's advice, Lydgate had determined on speaking to
Dorothea.  She had not been present while her uncle was throwing out
his pleasant suggestions as to the mode in which life at Lowick might
be enlivened, but she was usually by her husband's side, and the
unaffected signs of intense anxiety in her face and voice about
whatever touched his mind or health, made a drama which Lydgate was
inclined to watch.  He said to himself that he was only doing right in
telling her the truth about her husband's probable future, but he
certainly thought also that it would be interesting to talk
confidentially with her.  A medical man likes to make psychological
observations, and sometimes in the pursuit of such studies is too
easily tempted into momentous prophecy which life and death easily set
at nought.  Lydgate had often been satirical on this gratuitous
prediction, and he meant now to be guarded.

He asked for Mrs. Casaubon, but being told that she was out walking, he
was going away, when Dorothea and Celia appeared, both glowing from
their struggle with the March wind.  When Lydgate begged to speak with
her alone, Dorothea opened the library door which happened to be the
nearest, thinking of nothing at the moment but what he might have to
say about Mr. Casaubon.  It was the first time she had entered this
room since her husband had been taken ill, and the servant had chosen
not to open the shutters.  But there was light enough to read by from
the narrow upper panes of the windows.

"You will not mind this sombre light," said Dorothea, standing in the
middle of the room.  "Since you forbade books, the library has been out
of the question.  But Mr. Casaubon will soon be here again, I hope.  Is
he not making progress?"

"Yes, much more rapid progress than I at first expected.  Indeed, he is
already nearly in his usual state of health."

"You do not fear that the illness will return?" said Dorothea, whose
quick ear had detected some significance in Lydgate's tone.

"Such cases are peculiarly difficult to pronounce upon," said Lydgate.
"The only point on which I can be confident is that it will be
desirable to be very watchful on Mr. Casaubon's account, lest he should
in any way strain his nervous power."

"I beseech you to speak quite plainly," said Dorothea, in an imploring
tone.  "I cannot bear to think that there might be something which I
did not know, and which, if I had known it, would have made me act
differently."  The words came out like a cry: it was evident that they
were the voice of some mental experience which lay not very far off.

"Sit down," she added, placing herself on the nearest chair, and
throwing off her bonnet and gloves, with an instinctive discarding of
formality where a great question of destiny was concerned.

"What you say now justifies my own view," said Lydgate.  "I think it is
one's function as a medical man to hinder regrets of that sort as far
as possible.  But I beg you to observe that Mr. Casaubon's case is
precisely of the kind in which the issue is most difficult to pronounce
upon.  He may possibly live for fifteen years or more, without much
worse health than he has had hitherto."

Dorothea had turned very pale, and when Lydgate paused she said in a
low voice, "You mean if we are very careful."

"Yes--careful against mental agitation of all kinds, and against
excessive application."

"He would be miserable, if he had to give up his work," said Dorothea,
with a quick prevision of that wretchedness.

"I am aware of that.  The only course is to try by all means, direct
and indirect, to moderate and vary his occupations.  With a happy
concurrence of circumstances, there is, as I said, no immediate danger
from that affection of the heart, which I believe to have been the
cause of his late attack.  On the other hand, it is possible that the
disease may develop itself more rapidly: it is one of those cases in
which death is sometimes sudden.  Nothing should be neglected which
might be affected by such an issue."

There was silence for a few moments, while Dorothea sat as if she had
been turned to marble, though the life within her was so intense that
her mind had never before swept in brief time over an equal range of
scenes and motives.

"Help me, pray," she said, at last, in the same low voice as before.
"Tell me what I can do."

"What do you think of foreign travel?  You have been lately in Rome, I
think."

The memories which made this resource utterly hopeless were a new
current that shook Dorothea out of her pallid immobility.

"Oh, that would not do--that would be worse than anything," she said
with a more childlike despondency, while the tears rolled down.
"Nothing will be of any use that he does not enjoy."

"I wish that I could have spared you this pain," said Lydgate, deeply
touched, yet wondering about her marriage.  Women just like Dorothea
had not entered into his traditions.

"It was right of you to tell me.  I thank you for telling me the truth."

"I wish you to understand that I shall not say anything to enlighten
Mr. Casaubon himself.  I think it desirable for him to know nothing
more than that he must not overwork himself, and must observe certain
rules.  Anxiety of any kind would be precisely the most unfavorable
condition for him."

Lydgate rose, and Dorothea mechanically rose at the same time,
unclasping her cloak and throwing it off as if it stifled her.  He was
bowing and quitting her, when an impulse which if she had been alone
would have turned into a prayer, made her say with a sob in her voice--

"Oh, you are a wise man, are you not?  You know all about life and
death.  Advise me.  Think what I can do.  He has been laboring all his
life and looking forward.  He minds about nothing else.--  And I mind
about nothing else--"

For years after Lydgate remembered the impression produced in him by
this involuntary appeal--this cry from soul to soul, without other
consciousness than their moving with kindred natures in the same
embroiled medium, the same troublous fitfully illuminated life.  But
what could he say now except that he should see Mr. Casaubon again
to-morrow?

When he was gone, Dorothea's tears gushed forth, and relieved her
stifling oppression.  Then she dried her eyes, reminded that her
distress must not be betrayed to her husband; and looked round the room
thinking that she must order the servant to attend to it as usual,
since Mr. Casaubon might now at any moment wish to enter.  On his
writing-table there were letters which had lain untouched since the
morning when he was taken ill, and among them, as Dorothea well
remembered, there were young Ladislaw's letters, the one addressed to
her still unopened.  The associations of these letters had been made
the more painful by that sudden attack of illness which she felt that
the agitation caused by her anger might have helped to bring on: it
would be time enough to read them when they were again thrust upon her,
and she had had no inclination to fetch them from the library.  But now
it occurred to her that they should be put out of her husband's sight:
whatever might have been the sources of his annoyance about them, he
must, if possible, not be annoyed again; and she ran her eyes first
over the letter addressed to him to assure herself whether or not it
would be necessary to write in order to hinder the offensive visit.

Will wrote from Rome, and began by saying that his obligations to Mr.
Casaubon were too deep for all thanks not to seem impertinent.  It was
plain that if he were not grateful, he must be the poorest-spirited
rascal who had ever found a generous friend.  To expand in wordy thanks
would be like saying, "I am honest." But Will had come to perceive that
his defects--defects which Mr. Casaubon had himself often pointed
to--needed for their correction that more strenuous position which his
relative's generosity had hitherto prevented from being inevitable.  He
trusted that he should make the best return, if return were possible,
by showing the effectiveness of the education for which he was
indebted, and by ceasing in future to need any diversion towards
himself of funds on which others might have a better claim.  He was
coming to England, to try his fortune, as many other young men were
obliged to do whose only capital was in their brains.  His friend
Naumann had desired him to take charge of the "Dispute"--the picture
painted for Mr. Casaubon, with whose permission, and Mrs. Casaubon's,
Will would convey it to Lowick in person.  A letter addressed to the
Poste Restante in Paris within the fortnight would hinder him, if
necessary, from arriving at an inconvenient moment.  He enclosed a
letter to Mrs. Casaubon in which he continued a discussion about art,
begun with her in Rome.

Opening her own letter Dorothea saw that it was a lively continuation
of his remonstrance with her fanatical sympathy and her want of sturdy
neutral delight in things as they were--an outpouring of his young
vivacity which it was impossible to read just now.  She had immediately
to consider what was to be done about the other letter: there was still
time perhaps to prevent Will from coming to Lowick.  Dorothea ended by
giving the letter to her uncle, who was still in the house, and begging
him to let Will know that Mr. Casaubon had been ill, and that his
health would not allow the reception of any visitors.

No one more ready than Mr. Brooke to write a letter: his only
difficulty was to write a short one, and his ideas in this case
expanded over the three large pages and the inward foldings.  He had
simply said to Dorothea--

"To be sure, I will write, my dear.  He's a very clever young
fellow--this young Ladislaw--I dare say will be a rising young man.
It's a good letter--marks his sense of things, you know.  However, I
will tell him about Casaubon."

But the end of Mr. Brooke's pen was a thinking organ, evolving
sentences, especially of a benevolent kind, before the rest of his mind
could well overtake them.  It expressed regrets and proposed remedies,
which, when Mr. Brooke read them, seemed felicitously
worded--surprisingly the right thing, and determined a sequel which he
had never before thought of.  In this case, his pen found it such a pity
young Ladislaw should not have come into the neighborhood just at
that time, in order that Mr. Brooke might make his acquaintance more
fully, and that they might go over the long-neglected Italian drawings
together--it also felt such an interest in a young man who was starting
in life with a stock of ideas--that by the end of the second page it
had persuaded Mr. Brooke to invite young Ladislaw, since he could not
be received at Lowick, to come to Tipton Grange.  Why not?  They could
find a great many things to do together, and this was a period of
peculiar growth--the political horizon was expanding, and--in short,
Mr. Brooke's pen went off into a little speech which it had lately
reported for that imperfectly edited organ the "Middlemarch Pioneer."
While Mr. Brooke was sealing this letter, he felt elated with an influx
of dim projects:--a young man capable of putting ideas into form, the
"Pioneer" purchased to clear the pathway for a new candidate, documents
utilized--who knew what might come of it all?  Since Celia was going to
marry immediately, it would be very pleasant to have a young fellow at
table with him, at least for a time.

But he went away without telling Dorothea what he had put into the
letter, for she was engaged with her husband, and--in fact, these
things were of no importance to her.



CHAPTER XXXI.

    How will you know the pitch of that great bell
    Too large for you to stir?  Let but a flute
    Play 'neath the fine-mixed metal listen close
    Till the right note flows forth, a silvery rill.
    Then shall the huge bell tremble--then the mass
    With myriad waves concurrent shall respond
    In low soft unison.


Lydgate that evening spoke to Miss Vincy of Mrs. Casaubon, and laid
some emphasis on the strong feeling she appeared to have for that
formal studious man thirty years older than herself.

"Of course she is devoted to her husband," said Rosamond, implying a
notion of necessary sequence which the scientific man regarded as the
prettiest possible for a woman; but she was thinking at the same time
that it was not so very melancholy to be mistress of Lowick Manor with
a husband likely to die soon.  "Do you think her very handsome?"

"She certainly is handsome, but I have not thought about it," said
Lydgate.

"I suppose it would be unprofessional," said Rosamond, dimpling.  "But
how your practice is spreading!  You were called in before to the
Chettams, I think; and now, the Casaubons."

"Yes," said Lydgate, in a tone of compulsory admission.  "But I don't
really like attending such people so well as the poor.  The cases are
more monotonous, and one has to go through more fuss and listen more
deferentially to nonsense."

"Not more than in Middlemarch," said Rosamond.  "And at least you go
through wide corridors and have the scent of rose-leaves everywhere."

"That is true, Mademoiselle de Montmorenci," said Lydgate, just bending
his head to the table and lifting with his fourth finger her delicate
handkerchief which lay at the mouth of her reticule, as if to enjoy its
scent, while he looked at her with a smile.

But this agreeable holiday freedom with which Lydgate hovered about the
flower of Middlemarch, could not continue indefinitely.  It was not
more possible to find social isolation in that town than elsewhere, and
two people persistently flirting could by no means escape from "the
various entanglements, weights, blows, clashings, motions, by which
things severally go on." Whatever Miss Vincy did must be remarked, and
she was perhaps the more conspicuous to admirers and critics because
just now Mrs. Vincy, after some struggle, had gone with Fred to stay a
little while at Stone Court, there being no other way of at once
gratifying old Featherstone and keeping watch against Mary Garth, who
appeared a less tolerable daughter-in-law in proportion as Fred's
illness disappeared.

Aunt Bulstrode, for example, came a little oftener into Lowick Gate to
see Rosamond, now she was alone.  For Mrs. Bulstrode had a true
sisterly feeling for her brother; always thinking that he might have
married better, but wishing well to the children.  Now Mrs. Bulstrode
had a long-standing intimacy with Mrs. Plymdale.  They had nearly the
same preferences in silks, patterns for underclothing, china-ware, and
clergymen; they confided their little troubles of health and household
management to each other, and various little points of superiority on
Mrs. Bulstrode's side, namely, more decided seriousness, more
admiration for mind, and a house outside the town, sometimes served to
give color to their conversation without dividing them--well-meaning
women both, knowing very little of their own motives.

Mrs. Bulstrode, paying a morning visit to Mrs. Plymdale, happened to
say that she could not stay longer, because she was going to see poor
Rosamond.

"Why do you say 'poor Rosamond'?" said Mrs. Plymdale, a round-eyed
sharp little woman, like a tamed falcon.

"She is so pretty, and has been brought up in such thoughtlessness.
The mother, you know, had always that levity about her, which makes me
anxious for the children."

"Well, Harriet, if I am to speak my mind," said Mrs. Plymdale, with
emphasis, "I must say, anybody would suppose you and Mr. Bulstrode
would be delighted with what has happened, for you have done everything
to put Mr. Lydgate forward."

"Selina, what do you mean?" said Mrs. Bulstrode, in genuine surprise.

"Not but what I am truly thankful for Ned's sake," said Mrs. Plymdale.
"He could certainly better afford to keep such a wife than some people
can; but I should wish him to look elsewhere.  Still a mother has
anxieties, and some young men would take to a bad life in consequence.
Besides, if I was obliged to speak, I should say I was not fond of
strangers coming into a town."

"I don't know, Selina," said Mrs. Bulstrode, with a little emphasis in
her turn.  "Mr. Bulstrode was a stranger here at one time.  Abraham and
Moses were strangers in the land, and we are told to entertain
strangers.  And especially," she added, after a slight pause, "when
they are unexceptionable."

"I was not speaking in a religious sense, Harriet.  I spoke as a
mother."

"Selina, I am sure you have never heard me say anything against a niece
of mine marrying your son."

"Oh, it is pride in Miss Vincy--I am sure it is nothing else," said
Mrs. Plymdale, who had never before given all her confidence to
"Harriet" on this subject.  "No young man in Middlemarch was good
enough for her: I have heard her mother say as much.  That is not a
Christian spirit, I think.  But now, from all I hear, she has found a
man as proud as herself."

"You don't mean that there is anything between Rosamond and Mr.
Lydgate?" said Mrs. Bulstrode, rather mortified at finding out her own
ignorance.

"Is it possible you don't know, Harriet?"

"Oh, I go about so little; and I am not fond of gossip; I really never
hear any.  You see so many people that I don't see.  Your circle is
rather different from ours."

"Well, but your own niece and Mr. Bulstrode's great favorite--and
yours too, I am sure, Harriet!  I thought, at one time, you meant him
for Kate, when she is a little older."

"I don't believe there can be anything serious at present," said Mrs.
Bulstrode.  "My brother would certainly have told me."

"Well, people have different ways, but I understand that nobody can see
Miss Vincy and Mr. Lydgate together without taking them to be engaged.
However, it is not my business.  Shall I put up the pattern of mittens?"

After this Mrs. Bulstrode drove to her niece with a mind newly
weighted.  She was herself handsomely dressed, but she noticed with a
little more regret than usual that Rosamond, who was just come in and
met her in walking-dress, was almost as expensively equipped.  Mrs.
Bulstrode was a feminine smaller edition of her brother, and had none
of her husband's low-toned pallor.  She had a good honest glance and
used no circumlocution.

"You are alone, I see, my dear," she said, as they entered the
drawing-room together, looking round gravely.  Rosamond felt sure that
her aunt had something particular to say, and they sat down near each
other.  Nevertheless, the quilling inside Rosamond's bonnet was so
charming that it was impossible not to desire the same kind of thing
for Kate, and Mrs. Bulstrode's eyes, which were rather fine, rolled
round that ample quilled circuit, while she spoke.

"I have just heard something about you that has surprised me very much,
Rosamond."

"What is that, aunt?"  Rosamond's eyes also were roaming over her
aunt's large embroidered collar.

"I can hardly believe it--that you should be engaged without my knowing
it--without your father's telling me."  Here Mrs. Bulstrode's eyes
finally rested on Rosamond's, who blushed deeply, and said--

"I am not engaged, aunt."

"How is it that every one says so, then--that it is the town's talk?"

"The town's talk is of very little consequence, I think," said
Rosamond, inwardly gratified.

"Oh, my dear, be more thoughtful; don't despise your neighbors so.
Remember you are turned twenty-two now, and you will have no fortune:
your father, I am sure, will not be able to spare you anything.  Mr.
Lydgate is very intellectual and clever; I know there is an attraction
in that.  I like talking to such men myself; and your uncle finds him
very useful.  But the profession is a poor one here.  To be sure, this
life is not everything; but it is seldom a medical man has true
religious views--there is too much pride of intellect.  And you are not
fit to marry a poor man.

"Mr. Lydgate is not a poor man, aunt.  He has very high connections."

"He told me himself he was poor."

"That is because he is used to people who have a high style of living."

"My dear Rosamond, _you_ must not think of living in high style."

Rosamond looked down and played with her reticule.  She was not a fiery
young lady and had no sharp answers, but she meant to live as she
pleased.

"Then it is really true?" said Mrs. Bulstrode, looking very earnestly
at her niece.  "You are thinking of Mr. Lydgate--there is some
understanding between you, though your father doesn't know.  Be open,
my dear Rosamond: Mr. Lydgate has really made you an offer?"

Poor Rosamond's feelings were very unpleasant.  She had been quite easy
as to Lydgate's feeling and intention, but now when her aunt put this
question she did not like being unable to say Yes.  Her pride was hurt,
but her habitual control of manner helped her.

"Pray excuse me, aunt.  I would rather not speak on the subject."

"You would not give your heart to a man without a decided prospect, I
trust, my dear.  And think of the two excellent offers I know of that
you have refused!--and one still within your reach, if you will not
throw it away.  I knew a very great beauty who married badly at last,
by doing so.  Mr. Ned Plymdale is a nice young man--some might think
good-looking; and an only son; and a large business of that kind is
better than a profession.  Not that marrying is everything. I would
have you seek first the kingdom of God.  But a girl should keep her
heart within her own power."

"I should never give it to Mr. Ned Plymdale, if it were.  I have
already refused him.  If I loved, I should love at once and without
change," said Rosamond, with a great sense of being a romantic heroine,
and playing the part prettily.

"I see how it is, my dear," said Mrs. Bulstrode, in a melancholy voice,
rising to go.  "You have allowed your affections to be engaged without
return."

"No, indeed, aunt," said Rosamond, with emphasis.

"Then you are quite confident that Mr. Lydgate has a serious attachment
to you?"

Rosamond's cheeks by this time were persistently burning, and she felt
much mortification.  She chose to be silent, and her aunt went away all
the more convinced.

Mr. Bulstrode in things worldly and indifferent was disposed to do what
his wife bade him, and she now, without telling her reasons, desired
him on the next opportunity to find out in conversation with Mr.
Lydgate whether he had any intention of marrying soon.  The result was
a decided negative.  Mr. Bulstrode, on being cross-questioned, showed
that Lydgate had spoken as no man would who had any attachment that
could issue in matrimony.  Mrs. Bulstrode now felt that she had a
serious duty before her, and she soon managed to arrange a tete-a-tete
with Lydgate, in which she passed from inquiries about Fred Vincy's
health, and expressions of her sincere anxiety for her brother's large
family, to general remarks on the dangers which lay before young people
with regard to their settlement in life.  Young men were often wild and
disappointing, making little return for the money spent on them, and a
girl was exposed to many circumstances which might interfere with her
prospects.

"Especially when she has great attractions, and her parents see much
company," said Mrs. Bulstrode "Gentlemen pay her attention, and engross
her all to themselves, for the mere pleasure of the moment, and that
drives off others.  I think it is a heavy responsibility, Mr. Lydgate,
to interfere with the prospects of any girl." Here Mrs. Bulstrode fixed
her eyes on him, with an unmistakable purpose of warning, if not of
rebuke.

"Clearly," said Lydgate, looking at her--perhaps even staring a little
in return.  "On the other hand, a man must be a great coxcomb to go
about with a notion that he must not pay attention to a young lady lest
she should fall in love with him, or lest others should think she must."

"Oh, Mr. Lydgate, you know well what your advantages are.  You know
that our young men here cannot cope with you.  Where you frequent a
house it may militate very much against a girl's making a desirable
settlement in life, and prevent her from accepting offers even if they
are made."

Lydgate was less flattered by his advantage over the Middlemarch
Orlandos than he was annoyed by the perception of Mrs. Bulstrode's
meaning.  She felt that she had spoken as impressively as it was
necessary to do, and that in using the superior word "militate" she had
thrown a noble drapery over a mass of particulars which were still
evident enough.

Lydgate was fuming a little, pushed his hair back with one hand, felt
curiously in his waistcoat-pocket with the other, and then stooped to
beckon the tiny black spaniel, which had the insight to decline his
hollow caresses.  It would not have been decent to go away, because he
had been dining with other guests, and had just taken tea.  But Mrs.
Bulstrode, having no doubt that she had been understood, turned the
conversation.

Solomon's Proverbs, I think, have omitted to say, that as the sore
palate findeth grit, so an uneasy consciousness heareth innuendoes.
The next day Mr. Farebrother, parting from Lydgate in the street,
supposed that they should meet at Vincy's in the evening.  Lydgate
answered curtly, no--he had work to do--he must give up going out in
the evening.

"What! you are going to get lashed to the mast, eh, and are stopping
your ears?" said the Vicar.  "Well, if you don't mean to be won by the
sirens, you are right to take precautions in time."

A few days before, Lydgate would have taken no notice of these words as
anything more than the Vicar's usual way of putting things.  They
seemed now to convey an innuendo which confirmed the impression that he
had been making a fool of himself and behaving so as to be
misunderstood: not, he believed, by Rosamond herself; she, he felt
sure, took everything as lightly as he intended it.  She had an
exquisite tact and insight in relation to all points of manners; but
the people she lived among were blunderers and busybodies.  However,
the mistake should go no farther.  He resolved--and kept his
resolution--that he would not go to Mr. Vincy's except on business.

Rosamond became very unhappy.  The uneasiness first stirred by her
aunt's questions grew and grew till at the end of ten days that she had
not seen Lydgate, it grew into terror at the blank that might possibly
come--into foreboding of that ready, fatal sponge which so cheaply
wipes out the hopes of mortals.  The world would have a new dreariness
for her, as a wilderness that a magician's spells had turned for a
little while into a garden.  She felt that she was beginning to know
the pang of disappointed love, and that no other man could be the
occasion of such delightful aerial building as she had been enjoying
for the last six months.  Poor Rosamond lost her appetite and felt as
forlorn as Ariadne--as a charming stage Ariadne left behind with all
her boxes full of costumes and no hope of a coach.

There are many wonderful mixtures in the world which are all alike
called love, and claim the privileges of a sublime rage which is an
apology for everything (in literature and the drama).  Happily Rosamond
did not think of committing any desperate act: she plaited her fair
hair as beautifully as usual, and kept herself proudly calm.  Her most
cheerful supposition was that her aunt Bulstrode had interfered in some
way to hinder Lydgate's visits: everything was better than a
spontaneous indifference in him.  Any one who imagines ten days too
short a time--not for falling into leanness, lightness, or other
measurable effects of passion, but--for the whole spiritual circuit of
alarmed conjecture and disappointment, is ignorant of what can go on in
the elegant leisure of a young lady's mind.

On the eleventh day, however, Lydgate when leaving Stone Court was
requested by Mrs. Vincy to let her husband know that there was a marked
change in Mr. Featherstone's health, and that she wished him to come to
Stone Court on that day.  Now Lydgate might have called at the
warehouse, or might have written a message on a leaf of his pocket-book
and left it at the door.  Yet these simple devices apparently did not
occur to him, from which we may conclude that he had no strong
objection to calling at the house at an hour when Mr. Vincy was not at
home, and leaving the message with Miss Vincy.  A man may, from various
motives, decline to give his company, but perhaps not even a sage would
be gratified that nobody missed him.  It would be a graceful, easy way
of piecing on the new habits to the old, to have a few playful words
with Rosamond about his resistance to dissipation, and his firm resolve
to take long fasts even from sweet sounds.  It must be confessed, also,
that momentary speculations as to all the possible grounds for Mrs.
Bulstrode's hints had managed to get woven like slight clinging hairs
into the more substantial web of his thoughts.

Miss Vincy was alone, and blushed so deeply when Lydgate came in that
he felt a corresponding embarrassment, and instead of any playfulness,
he began at once to speak of his reason for calling, and to beg her,
almost formally, to deliver the message to her father.  Rosamond, who
at the first moment felt as if her happiness were returning, was keenly
hurt by Lydgate's manner; her blush had departed, and she assented
coldly, without adding an unnecessary word, some trivial chain-work
which she had in her hands enabling her to avoid looking at Lydgate
higher than his chin.  In all failures, the beginning is certainly the
half of the whole.  After sitting two long moments while he moved his
whip and could say nothing, Lydgate rose to go, and Rosamond, made
nervous by her struggle between mortification and the wish not to
betray it, dropped her chain as if startled, and rose too,
mechanically.  Lydgate instantaneously stooped to pick up the chain.
When he rose he was very near to a lovely little face set on a fair
long neck which he had been used to see turning about under the most
perfect management of self-contented grace.  But as he raised his eyes
now he saw a certain helpless quivering which touched him quite newly,
and made him look at Rosamond with a questioning flash.  At this moment
she was as natural as she had ever been when she was five years old:
she felt that her tears had risen, and it was no use to try to do
anything else than let them stay like water on a blue flower or let
them fall over her cheeks, even as they would.

That moment of naturalness was the crystallizing feather-touch: it
shook flirtation into love.  Remember that the ambitious man who was
looking at those Forget-me-nots under the water was very warm-hearted
and rash.  He did not know where the chain went; an idea had thrilled
through the recesses within him which had a miraculous effect in
raising the power of passionate love lying buried there in no sealed
sepulchre, but under the lightest, easily pierced mould.  His words
were quite abrupt and awkward; but the tone made them sound like an
ardent, appealing avowal.

"What is the matter? you are distressed.  Tell me, pray."

Rosamond had never been spoken to in such tones before.  I am not sure
that she knew what the words were: but she looked at Lydgate and the
tears fell over her cheeks.  There could have been no more complete
answer than that silence, and Lydgate, forgetting everything else,
completely mastered by the outrush of tenderness at the sudden belief
that this sweet young creature depended on him for her joy, actually
put his arms round her, folding her gently and protectingly--he was
used to being gentle with the weak and suffering--and kissed each of
the two large tears.  This was a strange way of arriving at an
understanding, but it was a short way.  Rosamond was not angry, but she
moved backward a little in timid happiness, and Lydgate could now sit
near her and speak less incompletely.  Rosamond had to make her little
confession, and he poured out words of gratitude and tenderness with
impulsive lavishment.  In half an hour he left the house an engaged
man, whose soul was not his own, but the woman's to whom he had bound
himself.

He came again in the evening to speak with Mr. Vincy, who, just
returned from Stone Court, was feeling sure that it would not be long
before he heard of Mr. Featherstone's demise.  The felicitous word
"demise," which had seasonably occurred to him, had raised his spirits
even above their usual evening pitch.  The right word is always a
power, and communicates its definiteness to our action.  Considered as
a demise, old Featherstone's death assumed a merely legal aspect, so
that Mr. Vincy could tap his snuff-box over it and be jovial, without
even an intermittent affectation of solemnity; and Mr. Vincy hated both
solemnity and affectation.  Who was ever awe struck about a testator,
or sang a hymn on the title to real property?  Mr. Vincy was inclined
to take a jovial view of all things that evening: he even observed to
Lydgate that Fred had got the family constitution after all, and would
soon be as fine a fellow as ever again; and when his approbation of
Rosamond's engagement was asked for, he gave it with astonishing
facility, passing at once to general remarks on the desirableness of
matrimony for young men and maidens, and apparently deducing from the
whole the appropriateness of a little more punch.



CHAPTER XXXII.

    "They'll take suggestion as a cat laps milk."
                                --SHAKESPEARE: Tempest.


The triumphant confidence of the Mayor founded on Mr. Featherstone's
insistent demand that Fred and his mother should not leave him, was a
feeble emotion compared with all that was agitating the breasts of the
old man's blood-relations, who naturally manifested more their sense of
the family tie and were more visibly numerous now that he had become
bedridden.  Naturally: for when "poor Peter" had occupied his arm-chair
in the wainscoted parlor, no assiduous beetles for whom the cook
prepares boiling water could have been less welcome on a hearth which
they had reasons for preferring, than those persons whose Featherstone
blood was ill-nourished, not from penuriousness on their part, but from
poverty.  Brother Solomon and Sister Jane were rich, and the family
candor and total abstinence from false politeness with which they were
always received seemed to them no argument that their brother in the
solemn act of making his will would overlook the superior claims of
wealth.  Themselves at least he had never been unnatural enough to
banish from his house, and it seemed hardly eccentric that he should
have kept away Brother Jonah, Sister Martha, and the rest, who had no
shadow of such claims.  They knew Peter's maxim, that money was a good
egg, and should be laid in a warm nest.

But Brother Jonah, Sister Martha, and all the needy exiles, held a
different point of view.  Probabilities are as various as the faces to
be seen at will in fretwork or paper-hangings: every form is there,
from Jupiter to Judy, if you only look with creative inclination.  To
the poorer and least favored it seemed likely that since Peter had done
nothing for them in his life, he would remember them at the last.
Jonah argued that men liked to make a surprise of their wills, while
Martha said that nobody need be surprised if he left the best part of
his money to those who least expected it.  Also it was not to be
thought but that an own brother "lying there" with dropsy in his legs
must come to feel that blood was thicker than water, and if he didn't
alter his will, he might have money by him.  At any rate some
blood-relations should be on the premises and on the watch against
those who were hardly relations at all.  Such things had been known as
forged wills and disputed wills, which seemed to have the golden-hazy
advantage of somehow enabling non-legatees to live out of them.  Again,
those who were no blood-relations might be caught making away with
things--and poor Peter "lying there" helpless!  Somebody should be on
the watch.  But in this conclusion they were at one with Solomon and
Jane; also, some nephews, nieces, and cousins, arguing with still
greater subtilty as to what might be done by a man able to "will away"
his property and give himself large treats of oddity, felt in a
handsome sort of way that there was a family interest to be attended
to, and thought of Stone Court as a place which it would be nothing but
right for them to visit.  Sister Martha, otherwise Mrs. Cranch, living
with some wheeziness in the Chalky Flats, could not undertake the
journey; but her son, as being poor Peter's own nephew, could represent
her advantageously, and watch lest his uncle Jonah should make an
unfair use of the improbable things which seemed likely to happen.  In
fact there was a general sense running in the Featherstone blood that
everybody must watch everybody else, and that it would be well for
everybody else to reflect that the Almighty was watching him.

Thus Stone Court continually saw one or other blood-relation alighting
or departing, and Mary Garth had the unpleasant task of carrying their
messages to Mr. Featherstone, who would see none of them, and sent her
down with the still more unpleasant task of telling them so.  As
manager of the household she felt bound to ask them in good provincial
fashion to stay and eat; but she chose to consult Mrs. Vincy on the
point of extra down-stairs consumption now that Mr. Featherstone was
laid up.

"Oh, my dear, you must do things handsomely where there's last illness
and a property.  God knows, I don't grudge them every ham in the
house--only, save the best for the funeral.  Have some stuffed veal
always, and a fine cheese in cut.  You must expect to keep open house
in these last illnesses," said liberal Mrs. Vincy, once more of
cheerful note and bright plumage.

But some of the visitors alighted and did not depart after the handsome
treating to veal and ham.  Brother Jonah, for example (there are such
unpleasant people in most families; perhaps even in the highest
aristocracy there are Brobdingnag specimens, gigantically in debt and
bloated at greater expense)--Brother Jonah, I say, having come down in
the world, was mainly supported by a calling which he was modest enough
not to boast of, though it was much better than swindling either on
exchange or turf, but which did not require his presence at Brassing so
long as he had a good corner to sit in and a supply of food.  He chose
the kitchen-corner, partly because he liked it best, and partly because
he did not want to sit with Solomon, concerning whom he had a strong
brotherly opinion.  Seated in a famous arm-chair and in his best suit,
constantly within sight of good cheer, he had a comfortable
consciousness of being on the premises, mingled with fleeting
suggestions of Sunday and the bar at the Green Man; and he informed
Mary Garth that he should not go out of reach of his brother Peter
while that poor fellow was above ground.  The troublesome ones in a
family are usually either the wits or the idiots.  Jonah was the wit
among the Featherstones, and joked with the maid-servants when they
came about the hearth, but seemed to consider Miss Garth a suspicious
character, and followed her with cold eyes.

Mary would have borne this one pair of eyes with comparative ease, but
unfortunately there was young Cranch, who, having come all the way from
the Chalky Flats to represent his mother and watch his uncle Jonah,
also felt it his duty to stay and to sit chiefly in the kitchen to give
his uncle company.  Young Cranch was not exactly the balancing point
between the wit and the idiot,--verging slightly towards the latter
type, and squinting so as to leave everything in doubt about his
sentiments except that they were not of a forcible character.  When
Mary Garth entered the kitchen and Mr. Jonah Featherstone began to
follow her with his cold detective eyes, young Cranch turning his head
in the same direction seemed to insist on it that she should remark how
he was squinting, as if he did it with design, like the gypsies when
Borrow read the New Testament to them.  This was rather too much for
poor Mary; sometimes it made her bilious, sometimes it upset her
gravity.  One day that she had an opportunity she could not resist
describing the kitchen scene to Fred, who would not be hindered from
immediately going to see it, affecting simply to pass through.  But no
sooner did he face the four eyes than he had to rush through the
nearest door which happened to lead to the dairy, and there under the
high roof and among the pans he gave way to laughter which made a
hollow resonance perfectly audible in the kitchen.  He fled by another
doorway, but Mr. Jonah, who had not before seen Fred's white
complexion, long legs, and pinched delicacy of face, prepared many
sarcasms in which these points of appearance were wittily combined with
the lowest moral attributes.

"Why, Tom, _you_ don't wear such gentlemanly trousers--you haven't got
half such fine long legs," said Jonah to his nephew, winking at the
same time, to imply that there was something more in these statements
than their undeniableness.  Tom looked at his legs, but left it
uncertain whether he preferred his moral advantages to a more vicious
length of limb and reprehensible gentility of trouser.

In the large wainscoted parlor too there were constantly pairs of eyes
on the watch, and own relatives eager to be "sitters-up." Many came,
lunched, and departed, but Brother Solomon and the lady who had been
Jane Featherstone for twenty-five years before she was Mrs. Waule found
it good to be there every day for hours, without other calculable
occupation than that of observing the cunning Mary Garth (who was so
deep that she could be found out in nothing) and giving occasional dry
wrinkly indications of crying--as if capable of torrents in a wetter
season--at the thought that they were not allowed to go into Mr.
Featherstone's room.  For the old man's dislike of his own family
seemed to get stronger as he got less able to amuse himself by saying
biting things to them.  Too languid to sting, he had the more venom
refluent in his blood.

Not fully believing the message sent through Mary Garth, they had
presented themselves together within the door of the bedroom, both in
black--Mrs. Waule having a white handkerchief partially unfolded in her
hand--and both with faces in a sort of half-mourning purple; while Mrs.
Vincy with her pink cheeks and pink ribbons flying was actually
administering a cordial to their own brother, and the
light-complexioned Fred, his short hair curling as might be expected in
a gambler's, was lolling at his ease in a large chair.

Old Featherstone no sooner caught sight of these funereal figures
appearing in spite of his orders than rage came to strengthen him more
successfully than the cordial.  He was propped up on a bed-rest, and
always had his gold-headed stick lying by him.  He seized it now and
swept it backwards and forwards in as large an area as he could,
apparently to ban these ugly spectres, crying in a hoarse sort of
screech--

"Back, back, Mrs. Waule!  Back, Solomon!"

"Oh, Brother.  Peter," Mrs. Waule began--but Solomon put his hand
before her repressingly.  He was a large-cheeked man, nearly seventy,
with small furtive eyes, and was not only of much blander temper but
thought himself much deeper than his brother Peter; indeed not likely
to be deceived in any of his fellow-men, inasmuch as they could not
well be more greedy and deceitful than he suspected them of being.
Even the invisible powers, he thought, were likely to be soothed by a
bland parenthesis here and there--coming from a man of property, who
might have been as impious as others.

"Brother Peter," he said, in a wheedling yet gravely official tone,
"It's nothing but right I should speak to you about the Three Crofts
and the Manganese.  The Almighty knows what I've got on my mind--"

"Then he knows more than I want to know," said Peter, laying down his
stick with a show of truce which had a threat in it too, for he
reversed the stick so as to make the gold handle a club in case of
closer fighting, and looked hard at Solomon's bald head.

"There's things you might repent of, Brother, for want of speaking to
me," said Solomon, not advancing, however.  "I could sit up with you
to-night, and Jane with me, willingly, and you might take your own time
to speak, or let me speak."

"Yes, I shall take my own time--you needn't offer me yours," said Peter.

"But you can't take your own time to die in, Brother," began Mrs.
Waule, with her usual woolly tone.  "And when you lie speechless you
may be tired of having strangers about you, and you may think of me and
my children"--but here her voice broke under the touching thought which
she was attributing to her speechless brother; the mention of ourselves
being naturally affecting.

"No, I shan't," said old Featherstone, contradictiously.  "I shan't
think of any of you.  I've made my will, I tell you, I've made my
will."  Here he turned his head towards Mrs. Vincy, and swallowed some
more of his cordial.

"Some people would be ashamed to fill up a place belonging by rights to
others," said Mrs. Waule, turning her narrow eyes in the same direction.

"Oh, sister," said Solomon, with ironical softness, "you and me are not
fine, and handsome, and clever enough: we must be humble and let smart
people push themselves before us."

Fred's spirit could not bear this: rising and looking at Mr.
Featherstone, he said, "Shall my mother and I leave the room, sir, that
you may be alone with your friends?"

"Sit down, I tell you," said old Featherstone, snappishly.  "Stop where
you are.  Good-by, Solomon," he added, trying to wield his stick again,
but failing now that he had reversed the handle.  "Good-by, Mrs. Waule.
Don't you come again."

"I shall be down-stairs, Brother, whether or no," said Solomon.  "I
shall do my duty, and it remains to be seen what the Almighty will
allow."

"Yes, in property going out of families," said Mrs. Waule, in
continuation,--"and where there's steady young men to carry on.  But I
pity them who are not such, and I pity their mothers.  Good-by, Brother
Peter."

"Remember, I'm the eldest after you, Brother, and prospered from the
first, just as you did, and have got land already by the name of
Featherstone," said Solomon, relying much on that reflection, as one
which might be suggested in the watches of the night.  "But I bid you
good-by for the present."

Their exit was hastened by their seeing old Mr. Featherstone pull his
wig on each side and shut his eyes with his mouth-widening grimace, as
if he were determined to be deaf and blind.

None the less they came to Stone Court daily and sat below at the post
of duty, sometimes carrying on a slow dialogue in an undertone in which
the observation and response were so far apart, that any one hearing
them might have imagined himself listening to speaking automata, in
some doubt whether the ingenious mechanism would really work, or wind
itself up for a long time in order to stick and be silent.  Solomon and
Jane would have been sorry to be quick: what that led to might be seen
on the other side of the wall in the person of Brother Jonah.

But their watch in the wainscoted parlor was sometimes varied by the
presence of other guests from far or near.  Now that Peter Featherstone
was up-stairs, his property could be discussed with all that local
enlightenment to be found on the spot: some rural and Middlemarch
neighbors expressed much agreement with the family and sympathy with
their interest against the Vincys, and feminine visitors were even
moved to tears, in conversation with Mrs. Waule, when they recalled the
fact that they themselves had been disappointed in times past by
codicils and marriages for spite on the part of ungrateful elderly
gentlemen, who, it might have been supposed, had been spared for
something better.  Such conversation paused suddenly, like an organ
when the bellows are let drop, if Mary Garth came into the room; and
all eyes were turned on her as a possible legatee, or one who might get
access to iron chests.

But the younger men who were relatives or connections of the family,
were disposed to admire her in this problematic light, as a girl who
showed much conduct, and who among all the chances that were flying
might turn out to be at least a moderate prize.  Hence she had her
share of compliments and polite attentions.

Especially from Mr. Borthrop Trumbull, a distinguished bachelor and
auctioneer of those parts, much concerned in the sale of land and
cattle: a public character, indeed, whose name was seen on widely
distributed placards, and who might reasonably be sorry for those who
did not know of him.  He was second cousin to Peter Featherstone, and
had been treated by him with more amenity than any other relative,
being useful in matters of business; and in that programme of his
funeral which the old man had himself dictated, he had been named as a
Bearer.  There was no odious cupidity in Mr. Borthrop Trumbull--nothing
more than a sincere sense of his own merit, which, he was aware, in
case of rivalry might tell against competitors; so that if Peter
Featherstone, who so far as he, Trumbull, was concerned, had
behaved like as good a soul as ever breathed, should have done anything
handsome by him, all he could say was, that he had never fished and
fawned, but had advised him to the best of his experience, which now
extended over twenty years from the time of his apprenticeship at
fifteen, and was likely to yield a knowledge of no surreptitious kind.
His admiration was far from being confined to himself, but was
accustomed professionally as well as privately to delight in estimating
things at a high rate.  He was an amateur of superior phrases, and
never used poor language without immediately correcting himself--which
was fortunate, as he was rather loud, and given to predominate,
standing or walking about frequently, pulling down his waistcoat with
the air of a man who is very much of his own opinion, trimming himself
rapidly with his fore-finger, and marking each new series in these
movements by a busy play with his large seals.  There was occasionally
a little fierceness in his demeanor, but it was directed chiefly
against false opinion, of which there is so much to correct in the
world that a man of some reading and experience necessarily has his
patience tried.  He felt that the Featherstone family generally was of
limited understanding, but being a man of the world and a public
character, took everything as a matter of course, and even went to
converse with Mr. Jonah and young Cranch in the kitchen, not doubting
that he had impressed the latter greatly by his leading questions
concerning the Chalky Flats.  If anybody had observed that Mr. Borthrop
Trumbull, being an auctioneer, was bound to know the nature of
everything, he would have smiled and trimmed himself silently with the
sense that he came pretty near that.  On the whole, in an auctioneering
way, he was an honorable man, not ashamed of his business, and feeling
that "the celebrated Peel, now Sir Robert," if introduced to him, would
not fail to recognize his importance.

"I don't mind if I have a slice of that ham, and a glass of that ale,
Miss Garth, if you will allow me," he said, coming into the parlor at
half-past eleven, after having had the exceptional privilege of seeing
old Featherstone, and standing with his back to the fire between Mrs.
Waule and Solomon.

"It's not necessary for you to go out;--let me ring the bell."

"Thank you," said Mary, "I have an errand."

"Well, Mr. Trumbull, you're highly favored," said Mrs. Waule.

"What! seeing the old man?" said the auctioneer, playing with his seals
dispassionately. "Ah, you see he has relied on me considerably." Here
he pressed his lips together, and frowned meditatively.

"Might anybody ask what their brother has been saying?" said Solomon,
in a soft tone of humility, in which he had a sense of luxurious
cunning, he being a rich man and not in need of it.

"Oh yes, anybody may ask," said Mr. Trumbull, with loud and
good-humored though cutting sarcasm.  "Anybody may interrogate.  Any
one may give their remarks an interrogative turn," he continued, his
sonorousness rising with his style.  "This is constantly done by good
speakers, even when they anticipate no answer.  It is what we call a
figure of speech--speech at a high figure, as one may say." The
eloquent auctioneer smiled at his own ingenuity.

"I shouldn't be sorry to hear he'd remembered you, Mr. Trumbull," said
Solomon.  "I never was against the deserving.  It's the undeserving I'm
against."

"Ah, there it is, you see, there it is," said Mr. Trumbull,
significantly.  "It can't be denied that undeserving people have been
legatees, and even residuary legatees.  It is so, with testamentary
dispositions."  Again he pursed up his lips and frowned a little.

"Do you mean to say for certain, Mr. Trumbull, that my brother has left
his land away from our family?" said Mrs. Waule, on whom, as an
unhopeful woman, those long words had a depressing effect.

"A man might as well turn his land into charity land at once as leave
it to some people," observed Solomon, his sister's question having
drawn no answer.

"What, Blue-Coat land?" said Mrs. Waule, again.  "Oh, Mr. Trumbull, you
never can mean to say that.  It would be flying in the face of the
Almighty that's prospered him."

While Mrs. Waule was speaking, Mr. Borthrop Trumbull walked away from
the fireplace towards the window, patrolling with his fore-finger round
the inside of his stock, then along his whiskers and the curves of his
hair.  He now walked to Miss Garth's work-table, opened a book which
lay there and read the title aloud with pompous emphasis as if he were
offering it for sale:

"'Anne of Geierstein' (pronounced Jeersteen) or the 'Maiden of the
Mist, by the author of Waverley.'"  Then turning the page, he began
sonorously--"The course of four centuries has well-nigh elapsed since
the series of events which are related in the following chapters took
place on the Continent."  He pronounced the last truly admirable word
with the accent on the last syllable, not as unaware of vulgar usage,
but feeling that this novel delivery enhanced the sonorous beauty which
his reading had given to the whole.

And now the servant came in with the tray, so that the moments for
answering Mrs. Waule's question had gone by safely, while she and
Solomon, watching Mr. Trumbull's movements, were thinking that high
learning interfered sadly with serious affairs.  Mr. Borthrop Trumbull
really knew nothing about old Featherstone's will; but he could hardly
have been brought to declare any ignorance unless he had been arrested
for misprision of treason.

"I shall take a mere mouthful of ham and a glass of ale," he said,
reassuringly.  "As a man with public business, I take a snack when I
can.  I will back this ham," he added, after swallowing some morsels
with alarming haste, "against any ham in the three kingdoms.  In my
opinion it is better than the hams at Freshitt Hall--and I think I am
a tolerable judge."

"Some don't like so much sugar in their hams," said Mrs. Waule.  "But
my poor brother would always have sugar."

"If any person demands better, he is at liberty to do so; but, God
bless me, what an aroma!  I should be glad to buy in that quality, I
know.  There is some gratification to a gentleman"--here Mr.
Trumbull's voice conveyed an emotional remonstrance--"in having this
kind of ham set on his table."

He pushed aside his plate, poured out his glass of ale and drew his
chair a little forward, profiting by the occasion to look at the inner
side of his legs, which he stroked approvingly--Mr. Trumbull having
all those less frivolous airs and gestures which distinguish the
predominant races of the north.

"You have an interesting work there, I see, Miss Garth," he observed,
when Mary re-entered. "It is by the author of 'Waverley': that is Sir
Walter Scott.  I have bought one of his works myself--a very nice
thing, a very superior publication, entitled 'Ivanhoe.' You will not
get any writer to beat him in a hurry, I think--he will not, in my
opinion, be speedily surpassed.  I have just been reading a portion at
the commencement of 'Anne of Jeersteen.' It commences well."  (Things
never began with Mr. Borthrop Trumbull: they always commenced, both in
private life and on his handbills.) "You are a reader, I see.  Do you
subscribe to our Middlemarch library?"

"No," said Mary.  "Mr. Fred Vincy brought this book."

"I am a great bookman myself," returned Mr. Trumbull.  "I have no less
than two hundred volumes in calf, and I flatter myself they are well
selected.  Also pictures by Murillo, Rubens, Teniers, Titian, Vandyck,
and others.  I shall be happy to lend you any work you like to mention,
Miss Garth."

"I am much obliged," said Mary, hastening away again, "but I have
little time for reading."

"I should say my brother has done something for _her_ in his will,"
said Mr. Solomon, in a very low undertone, when she had shut the door
behind her, pointing with his head towards the absent Mary.

"His first wife was a poor match for him, though," said Mrs. Waule.
"She brought him nothing: and this young woman is only her niece,--and
very proud.  And my brother has always paid her wage."

"A sensible girl though, in my opinion," said Mr. Trumbull, finishing
his ale and starting up with an emphatic adjustment of his waistcoat.
"I have observed her when she has been mixing medicine in drops.  She
minds what she is doing, sir.  That is a great point in a woman, and a
great point for our friend up-stairs, poor dear old soul.  A man whose
life is of any value should think of his wife as a nurse: that is what
I should do, if I married; and I believe I have lived single long
enough not to make a mistake in that line.  Some men must marry to
elevate themselves a little, but when I am in need of that, I hope some
one will tell me so--I hope some individual will apprise me of the
fact.  I wish you good morning, Mrs. Waule.  Good morning, Mr. Solomon.
I trust we shall meet under less melancholy auspices."

When Mr. Trumbull had departed with a fine bow, Solomon, leaning
forward, observed to his sister, "You may depend, Jane, my brother has
left that girl a lumping sum."

"Anybody would think so, from the way Mr. Trumbull talks," said Jane.
Then, after a pause, "He talks as if my daughters wasn't to be trusted
to give drops."

"Auctioneers talk wild," said Solomon.  "Not but what Trumbull has made
money."



CHAPTER XXXIII.

    "Close up his eyes and draw the curtain close;
     And let us all to meditation."
                              --2 Henry VI.


That night after twelve o'clock Mary Garth relieved the watch in Mr.
Featherstone's room, and sat there alone through the small hours.  She
often chose this task, in which she found some pleasure,
notwithstanding the old man's testiness whenever he demanded her
attentions.  There were intervals in which she could sit perfectly
still, enjoying the outer stillness and the subdued light.  The red
fire with its gently audible movement seemed like a solemn existence
calmly independent of the petty passions, the imbecile desires, the
straining after worthless uncertainties, which were daily moving her
contempt.  Mary was fond of her own thoughts, and could amuse herself
well sitting in twilight with her hands in her lap; for, having early
had strong reason to believe that things were not likely to be arranged
for her peculiar satisfaction, she wasted no time in astonishment and
annoyance at that fact.  And she had already come to take life very
much as a comedy in which she had a proud, nay, a generous resolution
not to act the mean or treacherous part.  Mary might have become
cynical if she had not had parents whom she honored, and a well of
affectionate gratitude within her, which was all the fuller because she
had learned to make no unreasonable claims.

She sat to-night revolving, as she was wont, the scenes of the day, her
lips often curling with amusement at the oddities to which her fancy
added fresh drollery: people were so ridiculous with their illusions,
carrying their fool's caps unawares, thinking their own lies opaque
while everybody else's were transparent, making themselves exceptions
to everything, as if when all the world looked yellow under a lamp they
alone were rosy.  Yet there were some illusions under Mary's eyes which
were not quite comic to her.  She was secretly convinced, though she
had no other grounds than her close observation of old Featherstone's
nature, that in spite of his fondness for having the Vincys about him,
they were as likely to be disappointed as any of the relations whom he
kept at a distance.  She had a good deal of disdain for Mrs. Vincy's
evident alarm lest she and Fred should be alone together, but it did
not hinder her from thinking anxiously of the way in which Fred would
be affected, if it should turn out that his uncle had left him as poor
as ever.  She could make a butt of Fred when he was present, but she
did not enjoy his follies when he was absent.

Yet she liked her thoughts: a vigorous young mind not overbalanced by
passion, finds a good in making acquaintance with life, and watches its
own powers with interest.  Mary had plenty of merriment within.

Her thought was not veined by any solemnity or pathos about the old man
on the bed: such sentiments are easier to affect than to feel about an
aged creature whose life is not visibly anything but a remnant of
vices.  She had always seen the most disagreeable side of Mr.
Featherstone: he was not proud of her, and she was only useful to him.
To be anxious about a soul that is always snapping at you must be left
to the saints of the earth; and Mary was not one of them.  She had
never returned him a harsh word, and had waited on him faithfully: that
was her utmost.  Old Featherstone himself was not in the least anxious
about his soul, and had declined to see Mr. Tucker on the subject.

To-night he had not snapped, and for the first hour or two he lay
remarkably still, until at last Mary heard him rattling his bunch of
keys against the tin box which he always kept in the bed beside him.
About three o'clock he said, with remarkable distinctness, "Missy, come
here!"

Mary obeyed, and found that he had already drawn the tin box from under
the clothes, though he usually asked to have this done for him; and he
had selected the key.  He now unlocked the box, and, drawing from it
another key, looked straight at her with eyes that seemed to have
recovered all their sharpness and said, "How many of 'em are in the
house?"

"You mean of your own relations, sir," said Mary, well used to the old
man's way of speech.  He nodded slightly and she went on.

"Mr. Jonah Featherstone and young Cranch are sleeping here."

"Oh ay, they stick, do they? and the rest--they come every day, I'll
warrant--Solomon and Jane, and all the young uns?  They come peeping,
and counting and casting up?"

"Not all of them every day.  Mr. Solomon and Mrs. Waule are here every
day, and the others come often."

The old man listened with a grimace while she spoke, and then said,
relaxing his face, "The more fools they.  You hearken, missy.  It's
three o'clock in the morning, and I've got all my faculties as well as
ever I had in my life.  I know all my property, and where the money's
put out, and everything.  And I've made everything ready to change my
mind, and do as I like at the last.  Do you hear, missy?  I've got my
faculties."

"Well, sir?" said Mary, quietly.

He now lowered his tone with an air of deeper cunning.  "I've made two
wills, and I'm going to burn one.  Now you do as I tell you.  This is
the key of my iron chest, in the closet there.  You push well at the
side of the brass plate at the top, till it goes like a bolt: then you
can put the key in the front lock and turn it.  See and do that; and
take out the topmost paper--Last Will and Testament--big printed."

"No, sir," said Mary, in a firm voice, "I cannot do that."

"Not do it?  I tell you, you must," said the old man, his voice
beginning to shake under the shock of this resistance.

"I cannot touch your iron chest or your will.  I must refuse to do
anything that might lay me open to suspicion."

"I tell you, I'm in my right mind.  Shan't I do as I like at the last?
I made two wills on purpose.  Take the key, I say."

"No, sir, I will not," said Mary, more resolutely still.  Her repulsion
was getting stronger.

"I tell you, there's no time to lose."

"I cannot help that, sir.  I will not let the close of your life soil
the beginning of mine.  I will not touch your iron chest or your will."
She moved to a little distance from the bedside.

The old man paused with a blank stare for a little while, holding the
one key erect on the ring; then with an agitated jerk he began to work
with his bony left hand at emptying the tin box before him.

"Missy," he began to say, hurriedly, "look here! take the money--the
notes and gold--look here--take it--you shall have it all--do as I
tell you."

He made an effort to stretch out the key towards her as far as
possible, and Mary again retreated.

"I will not touch your key or your money, sir.  Pray don't ask me to do
it again.  If you do, I must go and call your brother."

He let his hand fall, and for the first time in her life Mary saw old
Peter Featherstone begin to cry childishly.  She said, in as gentle a
tone as she could command, "Pray put up your money, sir;" and then went
away to her seat by the fire, hoping this would help to convince him
that it was useless to say more.  Presently he rallied and said
eagerly--

"Look here, then.  Call the young chap.  Call Fred Vincy."

Mary's heart began to beat more quickly.  Various ideas rushed through
her mind as to what the burning of a second will might imply.  She had
to make a difficult decision in a hurry.

"I will call him, if you will let me call Mr. Jonah and others with
him."

"Nobody else, I say.  The young chap.  I shall do as I like."

"Wait till broad daylight, sir, when every one is stirring.  Or let me
call Simmons now, to go and fetch the lawyer?  He can be here in less
than two hours."

"Lawyer?  What do I want with the lawyer?  Nobody shall know--I say,
nobody shall know.  I shall do as I like."

"Let me call some one else, sir," said Mary, persuasively.  She did not
like her position--alone with the old man, who seemed to show a strange
flaring of nervous energy which enabled him to speak again and again
without falling into his usual cough; yet she desired not to push
unnecessarily the contradiction which agitated him.  "Let me, pray,
call some one else."

"You let me alone, I say.  Look here, missy.  Take the money.  You'll
never have the chance again.  It's pretty nigh two hundred--there's
more in the box, and nobody knows how much there was.  Take it and do
as I tell you."

Mary, standing by the fire, saw its red light falling on the old man,
propped up on his pillows and bed-rest, with his bony hand holding out
the key, and the money lying on the quilt before him.  She never forgot
that vision of a man wanting to do as he liked at the last.  But the
way in which he had put the offer of the money urged her to speak with
harder resolution than ever.

"It is of no use, sir.  I will not do it.  Put up your money.  I will
not touch your money.  I will do anything else I can to comfort you;
but I will not touch your keys or your money."

"Anything else anything else!" said old Featherstone, with hoarse rage,
which, as if in a nightmare, tried to be loud, and yet was only just
audible.  "I want nothing else.  You come here--you come here."

Mary approached him cautiously, knowing him too well.  She saw him
dropping his keys and trying to grasp his stick, while he looked at her
like an aged hyena, the muscles of his face getting distorted with the
effort of his hand.  She paused at a safe distance.

"Let me give you some cordial," she said, quietly, "and try to compose
yourself.  You will perhaps go to sleep.  And to-morrow by daylight you
can do as you like."

He lifted the stick, in spite of her being beyond his reach, and threw
it with a hard effort which was but impotence.  It fell, slipping over
the foot of the bed.  Mary let it lie, and retreated to her chair by
the fire.  By-and-by she would go to him with the cordial.  Fatigue
would make him passive.  It was getting towards the chillest moment of
the morning, the fire had got low, and she could see through the chink
between the moreen window-curtains the light whitened by the blind.
Having put some wood on the fire and thrown a shawl over her, she sat
down, hoping that Mr. Featherstone might now fall asleep.  If she went
near him the irritation might be kept up.  He had said nothing after
throwing the stick, but she had seen him taking his keys again and
laying his right hand on the money.  He did not put it up, however, and
she thought that he was dropping off to sleep.

But Mary herself began to be more agitated by the remembrance of what
she had gone through, than she had been by the reality--questioning
those acts of hers which had come imperatively and excluded all
question in the critical moment.

Presently the dry wood sent out a flame which illuminated every
crevice, and Mary saw that the old man was lying quietly with his head
turned a little on one side.  She went towards him with inaudible
steps, and thought that his face looked strangely motionless; but the
next moment the movement of the flame communicating itself to all
objects made her uncertain.  The violent beating of her heart rendered
her perceptions so doubtful that even when she touched him and listened
for his breathing, she could not trust her conclusions.  She went to
the window and gently propped aside the curtain and blind, so that the
still light of the sky fell on the bed.

The next moment she ran to the bell and rang it energetically.  In a
very little while there was no longer any doubt that Peter Featherstone
was dead, with his right hand clasping the keys, and his left hand
lying on the heap of notes and gold.





BOOK IV.





THREE LOVE PROBLEMS.



CHAPTER XXXIV.

    1st Gent. Such men as this are feathers, chips, and straws.
                  Carry no weight, no force.
    2d Gent.                                  But levity
                  Is causal too, and makes the sum of weight.
                  For power finds its place in lack of power;
                  Advance is cession, and the driven ship
                  May run aground because the helmsman's thought
                  Lacked force to balance opposites."


It was on a morning of May that Peter Featherstone was buried.  In the
prosaic neighborhood of Middlemarch, May was not always warm and sunny,
and on this particular morning a chill wind was blowing the blossoms
from the surrounding gardens on to the green mounds of Lowick
churchyard.  Swiftly moving clouds only now and then allowed a gleam to
light up any object, whether ugly or beautiful, that happened to stand
within its golden shower.  In the churchyard the objects were
remarkably various, for there was a little country crowd waiting to see
the funeral.  The news had spread that it was to be a "big burying;"
the old gentleman had left written directions about everything and
meant to have a funeral "beyond his betters."  This was true; for old
Featherstone had not been a Harpagon whose passions had all been
devoured by the ever-lean and ever-hungry passion of saving, and who
would drive a bargain with his undertaker beforehand.  He loved money,
but he also loved to spend it in gratifying his peculiar tastes, and
perhaps he loved it best of all as a means of making others feel his
power more or less uncomfortably.  If any one will here contend that
there must have been traits of goodness in old Featherstone, I will not
presume to deny this; but I must observe that goodness is of a modest
nature, easily discouraged, and when much privacy, elbowed in early
life by unabashed vices, is apt to retire into extreme privacy, so that
it is more easily believed in by those who construct a selfish old
gentleman theoretically, than by those who form the narrower judgments
based on his personal acquaintance.  In any case, he had been bent on
having a handsome funeral, and on having persons "bid" to it who would
rather have stayed at home.  He had even desired that female relatives
should follow him to the grave, and poor sister Martha had taken a
difficult journey for this purpose from the Chalky Flats.  She and Jane
would have been altogether cheered (in a tearful manner) by this sign
that a brother who disliked seeing them while he was living had been
prospectively fond of their presence when he should have become a
testator, if the sign had not been made equivocal by being extended to
Mrs. Vincy, whose expense in handsome crape seemed to imply the most
presumptuous hopes, aggravated by a bloom of complexion which told
pretty plainly that she was not a blood-relation, but of that generally
objectionable class called wife's kin.

We are all of us imaginative in some form or other, for images are the
brood of desire; and poor old Featherstone, who laughed much at the way
in which others cajoled themselves, did not escape the fellowship of
illusion.  In writing the programme for his burial he certainly did not
make clear to himself that his pleasure in the little drama of which it
formed a part was confined to anticipation.  In chuckling over the
vexations he could inflict by the rigid clutch of his dead hand, he
inevitably mingled his consciousness with that livid stagnant presence,
and so far as he was preoccupied with a future life, it was with one of
gratification inside his coffin.  Thus old Featherstone was
imaginative, after his fashion.

However, the three mourning-coaches were filled according to the
written orders of the deceased.  There were pall-bearers on horseback,
with the richest scarfs and hatbands, and even the under-bearers had
trappings of woe which were of a good well-priced quality.  The black
procession, when dismounted, looked the larger for the smallness of the
churchyard; the heavy human faces and the black draperies shivering in
the wind seemed to tell of a world strangely incongruous with the
lightly dropping blossoms and the gleams of sunshine on the daisies.
The clergyman who met the procession was Mr. Cadwallader--also
according to the request of Peter Featherstone, prompted as usual by
peculiar reasons.  Having a contempt for curates, whom he always called
understrappers, he was resolved to be buried by a beneficed clergyman.
Mr. Casaubon was out of the question, not merely because he declined
duty of this sort, but because Featherstone had an especial dislike to
him as the rector of his own parish, who had a lien on the land in the
shape of tithe, also as the deliverer of morning sermons, which the old
man, being in his pew and not at all sleepy, had been obliged to sit
through with an inward snarl.  He had an objection to a parson stuck up
above his head preaching to him.  But his relations with Mr.
Cadwallader had been of a different kind: the trout-stream which ran
through Mr. Casaubon's land took its course through Featherstone's
also, so that Mr. Cadwallader was a parson who had had to ask a favor
instead of preaching.  Moreover, he was one of the high gentry living
four miles away from Lowick, and was thus exalted to an equal sky with
the sheriff of the county and other dignities vaguely regarded as
necessary to the system of things.  There would be a satisfaction in
being buried by Mr. Cadwallader, whose very name offered a fine
opportunity for pronouncing wrongly if you liked.

This distinction conferred on the Rector of Tipton and Freshitt was the
reason why Mrs. Cadwallader made one of the group that watched old
Featherstone's funeral from an upper window of the manor.  She was not
fond of visiting that house, but she liked, as she said, to see
collections of strange animals such as there would be at this funeral;
and she had persuaded Sir James and the young Lady Chettam to drive the
Rector and herself to Lowick in order that the visit might be
altogether pleasant.

"I will go anywhere with you, Mrs. Cadwallader," Celia had said; "but I
don't like funerals."

"Oh, my dear, when you have a clergyman in your family you must
accommodate your tastes: I did that very early.  When I married
Humphrey I made up my mind to like sermons, and I set out by liking the
end very much.  That soon spread to the middle and the beginning,
because I couldn't have the end without them."

"No, to be sure not," said the Dowager Lady Chettam, with stately
emphasis.

The upper window from which the funeral could be well seen was in the
room occupied by Mr. Casaubon when he had been forbidden to work; but
he had resumed nearly his habitual style of life now in spite of
warnings and prescriptions, and after politely welcoming Mrs.
Cadwallader had slipped again into the library to chew a cud of erudite
mistake about Cush and Mizraim.

But for her visitors Dorothea too might have been shut up in the
library, and would not have witnessed this scene of old Featherstone's
funeral, which, aloof as it seemed to be from the tenor of her life,
always afterwards came back to her at the touch of certain sensitive
points in memory, just as the vision of St. Peter's at Rome was inwoven
with moods of despondency.  Scenes which make vital changes in our
neighbors' lot are but the background of our own, yet, like a
particular aspect of the fields and trees, they become associated for
us with the epochs of our own history, and make a part of that unity
which lies in the selection of our keenest consciousness.

The dream-like association of something alien and ill-understood with
the deepest secrets of her experience seemed to mirror that sense of
loneliness which was due to the very ardor of Dorothea's nature.  The
country gentry of old time lived in a rarefied social air: dotted apart
on their stations up the mountain they looked down with imperfect
discrimination on the belts of thicker life below.  And Dorothea was
not at ease in the perspective and chilliness of that height.

"I shall not look any more," said Celia, after the train had entered
the church, placing herself a little behind her husband's elbow so that
she could slyly touch his coat with her cheek.  "I dare say Dodo likes
it: she is fond of melancholy things and ugly people."

"I am fond of knowing something about the people I live among," said
Dorothea, who had been watching everything with the interest of a monk
on his holiday tour.  "It seems to me we know nothing of our neighbors,
unless they are cottagers.  One is constantly wondering what sort of
lives other people lead, and how they take things.  I am quite obliged
to Mrs. Cadwallader for coming and calling me out of the library."

"Quite right to feel obliged to me," said Mrs. Cadwallader.  "Your rich
Lowick farmers are as curious as any buffaloes or bisons, and I dare
say you don't half see them at church.  They are quite different from
your uncle's tenants or Sir James's--monsters--farmers without
landlords--one can't tell how to class them."

"Most of these followers are not Lowick people," said Sir James; "I
suppose they are legatees from a distance, or from Middlemarch.
Lovegood tells me the old fellow has left a good deal of money as well
as land."

"Think of that now! when so many younger sons can't dine at their own
expense," said Mrs. Cadwallader.  "Ah," turning round at the sound of
the opening door, "here is Mr. Brooke.  I felt that we were incomplete
before, and here is the explanation.  You are come to see this odd
funeral, of course?"

"No, I came to look after Casaubon--to see how he goes on, you know.
And to bring a little news--a little news, my dear," said Mr. Brooke,
nodding at Dorothea as she came towards him.  "I looked into the
library, and I saw Casaubon over his books.  I told him it wouldn't do:
I said, 'This will never do, you know: think of your wife, Casaubon.'
And he promised me to come up.  I didn't tell him my news: I said, he
must come up."

"Ah, now they are coming out of church," Mrs. Cadwallader exclaimed.
"Dear me, what a wonderfully mixed set!  Mr. Lydgate as doctor, I
suppose.  But that is really a good looking woman, and the fair young
man must be her son.  Who are they, Sir James, do you know?"

"I see Vincy, the Mayor of Middlemarch; they are probably his wife and
son," said Sir James, looking interrogatively at Mr. Brooke, who nodded
and said--

"Yes, a very decent family--a very good fellow is Vincy; a credit to
the manufacturing interest.  You have seen him at my house, you know."

"Ah, yes: one of your secret committee," said Mrs. Cadwallader,
provokingly.

"A coursing fellow, though," said Sir James, with a fox-hunter's
disgust.

"And one of those who suck the life out of the wretched handloom
weavers in Tipton and Freshitt.  That is how his family look so fair
and sleek," said Mrs. Cadwallader.  "Those dark, purple-faced people
are an excellent foil.  Dear me, they are like a set of jugs!  Do look
at Humphrey: one might fancy him an ugly archangel towering above them
in his white surplice."

"It's a solemn thing, though, a funeral," said Mr. Brooke, "if you take
it in that light, you know."

"But I am not taking it in that light.  I can't wear my solemnity too
often, else it will go to rags.  It was time the old man died, and none
of these people are sorry."

"How piteous!" said Dorothea.  "This funeral seems to me the most
dismal thing I ever saw.  It is a blot on the morning I cannot bear to
think that any one should die and leave no love behind."

She was going to say more, but she saw her husband enter and seat
himself a little in the background.  The difference his presence made
to her was not always a happy one: she felt that he often inwardly
objected to her speech.

"Positively," exclaimed Mrs. Cadwallader, "there is a new face come out
from behind that broad man queerer than any of them: a little round
head with bulging eyes--a sort of frog-face--do look.  He must be of
another blood, I think."

"Let me see!" said Celia, with awakened curiosity, standing behind Mrs.
Cadwallader and leaning forward over her head.  "Oh, what an odd face!"
Then with a quick change to another sort of surprised expression, she
added, "Why, Dodo, you never told me that Mr. Ladislaw was come again!"

Dorothea felt a shock of alarm: every one noticed her sudden paleness
as she looked up immediately at her uncle, while Mr. Casaubon looked at
her.

"He came with me, you know; he is my guest--puts up with me at the
Grange," said Mr. Brooke, in his easiest tone, nodding at Dorothea, as
if the announcement were just what she might have expected.  "And we
have brought the picture at the top of the carriage.  I knew you would
be pleased with the surprise, Casaubon.  There you are to the very
life--as Aquinas, you know.  Quite the right sort of thing.  And you
will hear young Ladislaw talk about it.  He talks uncommonly
well--points out this, that, and the other--knows art and everything of
that kind--companionable, you know--is up with you in any track--what
I've been wanting a long while."

Mr. Casaubon bowed with cold politeness, mastering his irritation, but
only so far as to be silent.  He remembered Will's letter quite as well
as Dorothea did; he had noticed that it was not among the letters which
had been reserved for him on his recovery, and secretly concluding that
Dorothea had sent word to Will not to come to Lowick, he had shrunk
with proud sensitiveness from ever recurring to the subject.  He now
inferred that she had asked her uncle to invite Will to the Grange; and
she felt it impossible at that moment to enter into any explanation.

Mrs. Cadwallader's eyes, diverted from the churchyard, saw a good deal
of dumb show which was not so intelligible to her as she could have
desired, and could not repress the question, "Who is Mr. Ladislaw?"

"A young relative of Mr. Casaubon's," said Sir James, promptly.  His
good-nature often made him quick and clear-seeing in personal matters,
and he had divined from Dorothea's glance at her husband that there was
some alarm in her mind.

"A very nice young fellow--Casaubon has done everything for him,"
explained Mr. Brooke.  "He repays your expense in him, Casaubon," he
went on, nodding encouragingly.  "I hope he will stay with me a long
while and we shall make something of my documents.  I have plenty of
ideas and facts, you know, and I can see he is just the man to put them
into shape--remembers what the right quotations are, omne tulit
punctum, and that sort of thing--gives subjects a kind of turn.  I
invited him some time ago when you were ill, Casaubon; Dorothea said
you couldn't have anybody in the house, you know, and she asked me to
write."

Poor Dorothea felt that every word of her uncle's was about as pleasant
as a grain of sand in the eye to Mr. Casaubon.  It would be altogether
unfitting now to explain that she had not wished her uncle to invite
Will Ladislaw.  She could not in the least make clear to herself the
reasons for her husband's dislike to his presence--a dislike painfully
impressed on her by the scene in the library; but she felt the
unbecomingness of saying anything that might convey a notion of it to
others.  Mr. Casaubon, indeed, had not thoroughly represented those
mixed reasons to himself; irritated feeling with him, as with all of
us, seeking rather for justification than for self-knowledge. But he
wished to repress outward signs, and only Dorothea could discern the
changes in her husband's face before he observed with more of dignified
bending and sing-song than usual--

"You are exceedingly hospitable, my dear sir; and I owe you
acknowledgments for exercising your hospitality towards a relative of
mine."

The funeral was ended now, and the churchyard was being cleared.

"Now you can see him, Mrs. Cadwallader," said Celia.  "He is just like
a miniature of Mr. Casaubon's aunt that hangs in Dorothea's
boudoir--quite nice-looking."

"A very pretty sprig," said Mrs. Cadwallader, dryly.  "What is your
nephew to be, Mr. Casaubon?"

"Pardon me, he is not my nephew.  He is my cousin."

"Well, you know," interposed Mr. Brooke, "he is trying his wings.  He
is just the sort of young fellow to rise.  I should be glad to give him
an opportunity.  He would make a good secretary, now, like Hobbes,
Milton, Swift--that sort of man."

"I understand," said Mrs. Cadwallader.  "One who can write speeches."

"I'll fetch him in now, eh, Casaubon?" said Mr. Brooke.  "He wouldn't
come in till I had announced him, you know.  And we'll go down and look
at the picture.  There you are to the life: a deep subtle sort of
thinker with his fore-finger on the page, while Saint Bonaventure or
somebody else, rather fat and florid, is looking up at the Trinity.
Everything is symbolical, you know--the higher style of art: I like
that up to a certain point, but not too far--it's rather straining to
keep up with, you know.  But you are at home in that, Casaubon.  And
your painter's flesh is good--solidity, transparency, everything of
that sort.  I went into that a great deal at one time.  However, I'll
go and fetch Ladislaw."



CHAPTER XXXV.

    "Non, je ne comprends pas de plus charmant plaisir
     Que de voir d'heritiers une troupe affligee
     Le maintien interdit, et la mine allongee,
     Lire un long testament ou pales, etonnes
     On leur laisse un bonsoir avec un pied de nez.
     Pour voir au naturel leur tristesse profonde
     Je reviendrais, je crois, expres de l'autre monde."
                         --REGNARD: Le Legataire Universel.


When the animals entered the Ark in pairs, one may imagine that allied
species made much private remark on each other, and were tempted to
think that so many forms feeding on the same store of fodder were
eminently superfluous, as tending to diminish the rations.  (I fear the
part played by the vultures on that occasion would be too painful for
art to represent, those birds being disadvantageously naked about the
gullet, and apparently without rites and ceremonies.)

The same sort of temptation befell the Christian Carnivora who formed
Peter Featherstone's funeral procession; most of them having their
minds bent on a limited store which each would have liked to get the
most of.  The long-recognized blood-relations and connections by
marriage made already a goodly number, which, multiplied by
possibilities, presented a fine range for jealous conjecture and
pathetic hopefulness.  Jealousy of the Vincys had created a fellowship
in hostility among all persons of the Featherstone blood, so that in
the absence of any decided indication that one of themselves was to
have more than the rest, the dread lest that long-legged Fred Vincy
should have the land was necessarily dominant, though it left abundant
feeling and leisure for vaguer jealousies, such as were entertained
towards Mary Garth.  Solomon found time to reflect that Jonah was
undeserving, and Jonah to abuse Solomon as greedy; Jane, the elder
sister, held that Martha's children ought not to expect so much as the
young Waules; and Martha, more lax on the subject of primogeniture, was
sorry to think that Jane was so "having."  These nearest of kin were
naturally impressed with the unreasonableness of expectations in
cousins and second cousins, and used their arithmetic in reckoning the
large sums that small legacies might mount to, if there were too many
of them.  Two cousins were present to hear the will, and a second
cousin besides Mr. Trumbull.  This second cousin was a Middlemarch
mercer of polite manners and superfluous aspirates.  The two cousins
were elderly men from Brassing, one of them conscious of claims on the
score of inconvenient expense sustained by him in presents of oysters
and other eatables to his rich cousin Peter; the other entirely
saturnine, leaning his hands and chin on a stick, and conscious of
claims based on no narrow performance but on merit generally: both
blameless citizens of Brassing, who wished that Jonah Featherstone did
not live there.  The wit of a family is usually best received among
strangers.

"Why, Trumbull himself is pretty sure of five hundred--_that_ you may
depend,--I shouldn't wonder if my brother promised him," said Solomon,
musing aloud with his sisters, the evening before the funeral.

"Dear, dear!" said poor sister Martha, whose imagination of hundreds
had been habitually narrowed to the amount of her unpaid rent.

But in the morning all the ordinary currents of conjecture were
disturbed by the presence of a strange mourner who had plashed among
them as if from the moon.  This was the stranger described by Mrs.
Cadwallader as frog-faced: a man perhaps about two or three and thirty,
whose prominent eyes, thin-lipped, downward-curved mouth, and hair
sleekly brushed away from a forehead that sank suddenly above the ridge
of the eyebrows, certainly gave his face a batrachian unchangeableness
of expression.  Here, clearly, was a new legatee; else why was he
bidden as a mourner?  Here were new possibilities, raising a new
uncertainty, which almost checked remark in the mourning-coaches. We
are all humiliated by the sudden discovery of a fact which has existed
very comfortably and perhaps been staring at us in private while we
have been making up our world entirely without it.  No one had seen
this questionable stranger before except Mary Garth, and she knew
nothing more of him than that he had twice been to Stone Court when Mr.
Featherstone was down-stairs, and had sat alone with him for several
hours.  She had found an opportunity of mentioning this to her father,
and perhaps Caleb's were the only eyes, except the lawyer's, which
examined the stranger with more of inquiry than of disgust or
suspicion.  Caleb Garth, having little expectation and less cupidity,
was interested in the verification of his own guesses, and the calmness
with which he half smilingly rubbed his chin and shot intelligent
glances much as if he were valuing a tree, made a fine contrast with
the alarm or scorn visible in other faces when the unknown mourner,
whose name was understood to be Rigg, entered the wainscoted parlor and
took his seat near the door to make part of the audience when the will
should be read.  Just then Mr. Solomon and Mr. Jonah were gone
up-stairs with the lawyer to search for the will; and Mrs. Waule,
seeing two vacant seats between herself and Mr. Borthrop Trumbull, had
the spirit to move next to that great authority, who was handling his
watch-seals and trimming his outlines with a determination not to show
anything so compromising to a man of ability as wonder or surprise.

"I suppose you know everything about what my poor brother's done, Mr.
Trumbull," said Mrs. Waule, in the lowest of her woolly tones, while
she turned her crape-shadowed bonnet towards Mr. Trumbull's ear.

"My good lady, whatever was told me was told in confidence," said the
auctioneer, putting his hand up to screen that secret.

"Them who've made sure of their good-luck may be disappointed yet,"
Mrs. Waule continued, finding some relief in this communication.

"Hopes are often delusive," said Mr. Trumbull, still in confidence.

"Ah!" said Mrs. Waule, looking across at the Vincys, and then moving
back to the side of her sister Martha.

"It's wonderful how close poor Peter was," she said, in the same
undertones.  "We none of us know what he might have had on his mind.  I
only hope and trust he wasn't a worse liver than we think of, Martha."

Poor Mrs. Cranch was bulky, and, breathing asthmatically, had the
additional motive for making her remarks unexceptionable and giving
them a general bearing, that even her whispers were loud and liable to
sudden bursts like those of a deranged barrel-organ.

"I never _was_ covetous, Jane," she replied; "but I have six children
and have buried three, and I didn't marry into money.  The eldest, that
sits there, is but nineteen--so I leave you to guess.  And stock always
short, and land most awkward.  But if ever I've begged and prayed; it's
been to God above; though where there's one brother a bachelor and the
other childless after twice marrying--anybody might think!"

Meanwhile, Mr. Vincy had glanced at the passive face of Mr. Rigg, and
had taken out his snuff-box and tapped it, but had put it again
unopened as an indulgence which, however clarifying to the judgment,
was unsuited to the occasion.  "I shouldn't wonder if Featherstone had
better feelings than any of us gave him credit for," he observed, in
the ear of his wife.  "This funeral shows a thought about everybody: it
looks well when a man wants to be followed by his friends, and if they
are humble, not to be ashamed of them.  I should be all the better
pleased if he'd left lots of small legacies.  They may be uncommonly
useful to fellows in a small way."

"Everything is as handsome as could be, crape and silk and everything,"
said Mrs. Vincy, contentedly.

But I am sorry to say that Fred was under some difficulty in repressing
a laugh, which would have been more unsuitable than his father's
snuff-box. Fred had overheard Mr. Jonah suggesting something about a
"love-child," and with this thought in his mind, the stranger's face,
which happened to be opposite him, affected him too ludicrously.  Mary
Garth, discerning his distress in the twitchings of his mouth, and his
recourse to a cough, came cleverly to his rescue by asking him to
change seats with her, so that he got into a shadowy corner.  Fred was
feeling as good-naturedly as possible towards everybody, including
Rigg; and having some relenting towards all these people who were less
lucky than he was aware of being himself, he would not for the world
have behaved amiss; still, it was particularly easy to laugh.

But the entrance of the lawyer and the two brothers drew every one's
attention.  The lawyer was Mr. Standish, and he had come to Stone Court
this morning believing that he knew thoroughly well who would be
pleased and who disappointed before the day was over.  The will he
expected to read was the last of three which he had drawn up for Mr.
Featherstone.  Mr. Standish was not a man who varied his manners: he
behaved with the same deep-voiced, off-hand civility to everybody, as
if he saw no difference in them, and talked chiefly of the hay-crop,
which would be "very fine, by God!" of the last bulletins concerning
the King, and of the Duke of Clarence, who was a sailor every inch of
him, and just the man to rule over an island like Britain.

Old Featherstone had often reflected as he sat looking at the fire that
Standish would be surprised some day: it is true that if he had done as
he liked at the last, and burnt the will drawn up by another lawyer, he
would not have secured that minor end; still he had had his pleasure in
ruminating on it.  And certainly Mr. Standish was surprised, but not at
all sorry; on the contrary, he rather enjoyed the zest of a little
curiosity in his own mind, which the discovery of a second will added
to the prospective amazement on the part of the Featherstone family.

As to the sentiments of Solomon and Jonah, they were held in utter
suspense: it seemed to them that the old will would have a certain
validity, and that there might be such an interlacement of poor Peter's
former and latter intentions as to create endless "lawing" before
anybody came by their own--an inconvenience which would have at least
the advantage of going all round.  Hence the brothers showed a
thoroughly neutral gravity as they re-entered with Mr. Standish; but
Solomon took out his white handkerchief again with a sense that in any
case there would be affecting passages, and crying at funerals, however
dry, was customarily served up in lawn.

Perhaps the person who felt the most throbbing excitement at this
moment was Mary Garth, in the consciousness that it was she who had
virtually determined the production of this second will, which might
have momentous effects on the lot of some persons present.  No soul
except herself knew what had passed on that final night.

"The will I hold in my hand," said Mr. Standish, who, seated at the
table in the middle of the room, took his time about everything,
including the coughs with which he showed a disposition to clear his
voice, "was drawn up by myself and executed by our deceased friend on
the 9th of August, 1825.  But I find that there is a subsequent
instrument hitherto unknown to me, bearing date the 20th of July, 1826,
hardly a year later than the previous one.  And there is farther, I
see"--Mr. Standish was cautiously travelling over the document with his
spectacles--"a codicil to this latter will, bearing date March 1, 1828."

"Dear, dear!" said sister Martha, not meaning to be audible, but driven
to some articulation under this pressure of dates.

"I shall begin by reading the earlier will," continued Mr. Standish,
"since such, as appears by his not having destroyed the document, was
the intention of deceased."

The preamble was felt to be rather long, and several besides Solomon
shook their heads pathetically, looking on the ground: all eyes avoided
meeting other eyes, and were chiefly fixed either on the spots in the
table-cloth or on Mr. Standish's bald head; excepting Mary Garth's.
When all the rest were trying to look nowhere in particular, it was
safe for her to look at them.  And at the sound of the first "give and
bequeath" she could see all complexions changing subtly, as if some
faint vibration were passing through them, save that of Mr. Rigg.  He
sat in unaltered calm, and, in fact, the company, preoccupied with more
important problems, and with the complication of listening to bequests
which might or might not be revoked, had ceased to think of him.  Fred
blushed, and Mr. Vincy found it impossible to do without his snuff-box
in his hand, though he kept it closed.

The small bequests came first, and even the recollection that there was
another will and that poor Peter might have thought better of it, could
not quell the rising disgust and indignation.  One likes to be done
well by in every tense, past, present, and future.  And here was Peter
capable five years ago of leaving only two hundred apiece to his own
brothers and sisters, and only a hundred apiece to his own nephews and
nieces: the Garths were not mentioned, but Mrs. Vincy and Rosamond were
each to have a hundred.  Mr. Trumbull was to have the gold-headed cane
and fifty pounds; the other second cousins and the cousins present were
each to have the like handsome sum, which, as the saturnine cousin
observed, was a sort of legacy that left a man nowhere; and there was
much more of such offensive dribbling in favor of persons not
present--problematical, and, it was to be feared, low connections.
Altogether, reckoning hastily, here were about three thousand disposed of.
Where then had Peter meant the rest of the money to go--and where the
land? and what was revoked and what not revoked--and was the revocation
for better or for worse?  All emotion must be conditional, and might turn
out to be the wrong thing.  The men were strong enough to bear up and
keep quiet under this confused suspense; some letting their lower lip
fall, others pursing it up, according to the habit of their muscles.
But Jane and Martha sank under the rush of questions, and began to cry;
poor Mrs. Cranch being half moved with the consolation of getting any
hundreds at all without working for them, and half aware that her share
was scanty; whereas Mrs. Waule's mind was entirely flooded with the
sense of being an own sister and getting little, while somebody else
was to have much.  The general expectation now was that the "much"
would fall to Fred Vincy, but the Vincys themselves were surprised when
ten thousand pounds in specified investments were declared to be
bequeathed to him:--was the land coming too?  Fred bit his lips: it was
difficult to help smiling, and Mrs. Vincy felt herself the happiest of
women--possible revocation shrinking out of sight in this dazzling
vision.

There was still a residue of personal property as well as the land, but
the whole was left to one person, and that person was--O
possibilities!  O expectations founded on the favor of "close" old
gentlemen!  O endless vocatives that would still leave expression
slipping helpless from the measurement of mortal folly!--that
residuary legatee was Joshua Rigg, who was also sole executor, and who
was to take thenceforth the name of Featherstone.

There was a rustling which seemed like a shudder running round the
room.  Every one stared afresh at Mr. Rigg, who apparently experienced
no surprise.

"A most singular testamentary disposition!" exclaimed Mr. Trumbull,
preferring for once that he should be considered ignorant in the past.
"But there is a second will--there is a further document.  We have not
yet heard the final wishes of the deceased."

Mary Garth was feeling that what they had yet to hear were not the
final wishes.  The second will revoked everything except the legacies
to the low persons before mentioned (some alterations in these being
the occasion of the codicil), and the bequest of all the land lying in
Lowick parish with all the stock and household furniture, to Joshua
Rigg.  The residue of the property was to be devoted to the erection
and endowment of almshouses for old men, to be called Featherstone's
Alms-Houses, and to be built on a piece of land near Middlemarch
already bought for the purpose by the testator, he wishing--so the
document declared--to please God Almighty.  Nobody present had a
farthing; but Mr. Trumbull had the gold-headed cane.  It took some time
for the company to recover the power of expression.  Mary dared not
look at Fred.

Mr. Vincy was the first to speak--after using his snuff-box
energetically--and he spoke with loud indignation.  "The most
unaccountable will I ever heard!  I should say he was not in his right
mind when he made it.  I should say this last will was void," added Mr.
Vincy, feeling that this expression put the thing in the true light.
"Eh Standish?"

"Our deceased friend always knew what he was about, I think," said Mr.
Standish.  "Everything is quite regular.  Here is a letter from
Clemmens of Brassing tied with the will.  He drew it up.  A very
respectable solicitor."

"I never noticed any alienation of mind--any aberration of intellect in
the late Mr. Featherstone," said Borthrop Trumbull, "but I call this
will eccentric.  I was always willingly of service to the old soul; and
he intimated pretty plainly a sense of obligation which would show
itself in his will.  The gold-headed cane is farcical considered as an
acknowledgment to me; but happily I am above mercenary considerations."

"There's nothing very surprising in the matter that I can see," said
Caleb Garth.  "Anybody might have had more reason for wondering if the
will had been what you might expect from an open-minded straightforward
man.  For my part, I wish there was no such thing as a will."

"That's a strange sentiment to come from a Christian man, by God!" said
the lawyer.  "I should like to know how you will back that up, Garth!"

"Oh," said Caleb, leaning forward, adjusting his finger-tips with
nicety and looking meditatively on the ground.  It always seemed to him
that words were the hardest part of "business."

But here Mr. Jonah Featherstone made himself heard.  "Well, he always
was a fine hypocrite, was my brother Peter.  But this will cuts out
everything.  If I'd known, a wagon and six horses shouldn't have drawn
me from Brassing.  I'll put a white hat and drab coat on to-morrow."

"Dear, dear," wept Mrs. Cranch, "and we've been at the expense of
travelling, and that poor lad sitting idle here so long!  It's the
first time I ever heard my brother Peter was so wishful to please God
Almighty; but if I was to be struck helpless I must say it's hard--I
can think no other."

"It'll do him no good where he's gone, that's my belief," said Solomon,
with a bitterness which was remarkably genuine, though his tone could
not help being sly.  "Peter was a bad liver, and almshouses won't cover
it, when he's had the impudence to show it at the last."

"And all the while had got his own lawful family--brothers and sisters
and nephews and nieces--and has sat in church with 'em whenever he
thought well to come," said Mrs. Waule.  "And might have left his
property so respectable, to them that's never been used to extravagance
or unsteadiness in no manner of way--and not so poor but what they
could have saved every penny and made more of it.  And me--the trouble
I've been at, times and times, to come here and be sisterly--and him
with things on his mind all the while that might make anybody's flesh
creep.  But if the Almighty's allowed it, he means to punish him for
it.  Brother Solomon, I shall be going, if you'll drive me."

"I've no desire to put my foot on the premises again," said Solomon.
"I've got land of my own and property of my own to will away."

"It's a poor tale how luck goes in the world," said Jonah.  "It never
answers to have a bit of spirit in you.  You'd better be a dog in the
manger.  But those above ground might learn a lesson.  One fool's will
is enough in a family."

"There's more ways than one of being a fool," said Solomon.  "I shan't
leave my money to be poured down the sink, and I shan't leave it to
foundlings from Africay.  I like Featherstones that were brewed such,
and not turned Featherstones with sticking the name on 'em."

Solomon addressed these remarks in a loud aside to Mrs. Waule as he
rose to accompany her.  Brother Jonah felt himself capable of much more
stinging wit than this, but he reflected that there was no use in
offending the new proprietor of Stone Court, until you were certain
that he was quite without intentions of hospitality towards witty men
whose name he was about to bear.

Mr. Joshua Rigg, in fact, appeared to trouble himself little about any
innuendoes, but showed a notable change of manner, walking coolly up to
Mr. Standish and putting business questions with much coolness.  He had
a high chirping voice and a vile accent.  Fred, whom he no longer moved
to laughter, thought him the lowest monster he had ever seen.  But Fred
was feeling rather sick.  The Middlemarch mercer waited for an
opportunity of engaging Mr. Rigg in conversation: there was no knowing
how many pairs of legs the new proprietor might require hose for, and
profits were more to be relied on than legacies.  Also, the mercer, as
a second cousin, was dispassionate enough to feel curiosity.

Mr. Vincy, after his one outburst, had remained proudly silent, though
too much preoccupied with unpleasant feelings to think of moving, till
he observed that his wife had gone to Fred's side and was crying
silently while she held her darling's hand.  He rose immediately, and
turning his back on the company while he said to her in an
undertone,--"Don't give way, Lucy; don't make a fool of yourself, my
dear, before these people," he added in his usual loud voice--"Go and
order the phaeton, Fred; I have no time to waste."

Mary Garth had before this been getting ready to go home with her
father.  She met Fred in the hall, and now for the first time had the
courage to look at him. He had that withered sort of paleness which
will sometimes come on young faces, and his hand was very cold when she
shook it.  Mary too was agitated; she was conscious that fatally,
without will of her own, she had perhaps made a great difference to
Fred's lot.

"Good-by," she said, with affectionate sadness.  "Be brave, Fred.  I do
believe you are better without the money.  What was the good of it to
Mr. Featherstone?"

"That's all very fine," said Fred, pettishly.  "What is a fellow to do?
I must go into the Church now."  (He knew that this would vex Mary:
very well; then she must tell him what else he could do.) "And I
thought I should be able to pay your father at once and make everything
right.  And you have not even a hundred pounds left you.  What shall
you do now, Mary?"

"Take another situation, of course, as soon as I can get one.  My
father has enough to do to keep the rest, without me.  Good-by."

In a very short time Stone Court was cleared of well-brewed
Featherstones and other long-accustomed visitors.  Another stranger had
been brought to settle in the neighborhood of Middlemarch, but in the
case of Mr. Rigg Featherstone there was more discontent with immediate
visible consequences than speculation as to the effect which his
presence might have in the future.  No soul was prophetic enough to
have any foreboding as to what might appear on the trial of Joshua Rigg.

And here I am naturally led to reflect on the means of elevating a low
subject.  Historical parallels are remarkably efficient in this way.
The chief objection to them is, that the diligent narrator may lack
space, or (what is often the same thing) may not be able to think of
them with any degree of particularity, though he may have a
philosophical confidence that if known they would be illustrative.  It
seems an easier and shorter way to dignity, to observe that--since
there never was a true story which could not be told in parables, where
you might put a monkey for a margrave, and vice versa--whatever has
been or is to be narrated by me about low people, may be ennobled by
being considered a parable; so that if any bad habits and ugly
consequences are brought into view, the reader may have the relief of
regarding them as not more than figuratively ungenteel, and may feel
himself virtually in company with persons of some style.  Thus while I
tell the truth about loobies, my reader's imagination need not be
entirely excluded from an occupation with lords; and the petty sums
which any bankrupt of high standing would be sorry to retire upon, may
be lifted to the level of high commercial transactions by the
inexpensive addition of proportional ciphers.

As to any provincial history in which the agents are all of high moral
rank, that must be of a date long posterior to the first Reform Bill,
and Peter Featherstone, you perceive, was dead and buried some months
before Lord Grey came into office.



CHAPTER XXXVI.

    "'Tis strange to see the humors of these men,
     These great aspiring spirits, that should be wise:
       .     .     .     .     .     .     .     .
     For being the nature of great spirits to love
     To be where they may be most eminent;
     They, rating of themselves so farre above
     Us in conceit, with whom they do frequent,
     Imagine how we wonder and esteeme
     All that they do or say; which makes them strive
     To make our admiration more extreme,
     Which they suppose they cannot, 'less they give
     Notice of their extreme and highest thoughts.
                                --DANIEL: Tragedy of Philotas.


Mr. Vincy went home from the reading of the will with his point of view
considerably changed in relation to many subjects.  He was an
open-minded man, but given to indirect modes of expressing himself:
when he was disappointed in a market for his silk braids, he swore at
the groom; when his brother-in-law Bulstrode had vexed him, he made
cutting remarks on Methodism; and it was now apparent that he regarded
Fred's idleness with a sudden increase of severity, by his throwing an
embroidered cap out of the smoking-room on to the hall-floor.

"Well, sir," he observed, when that young gentleman was moving off to
bed, "I hope you've made up your mind now to go up next term and pass
your examination.  I've taken my resolution, so I advise you to lose no
time in taking yours."

Fred made no answer: he was too utterly depressed.  Twenty-four hours
ago he had thought that instead of needing to know what he should do,
he should by this time know that he needed to do nothing: that he
should hunt in pink, have a first-rate hunter, ride to cover on a fine
hack, and be generally respected for doing so; moreover, that he should
be able at once to pay Mr. Garth, and that Mary could no longer have
any reason for not marrying him.  And all this was to have come without
study or other inconvenience, purely by the favor of providence in the
shape of an old gentleman's caprice.  But now, at the end of the
twenty-four hours, all those firm expectations were upset.  It was
"rather hard lines" that while he was smarting under this
disappointment he should be treated as if he could have helped it.  But
he went away silently and his mother pleaded for him.

"Don't be hard on the poor boy, Vincy.  He'll turn out well yet, though
that wicked man has deceived him.  I feel as sure as I sit here, Fred
will turn out well--else why was he brought back from the brink of the
grave?  And I call it a robbery: it was like giving him the land, to
promise it; and what is promising, if making everybody believe is not
promising?  And you see he did leave him ten thousand pounds, and then
took it away again."

"Took it away again!" said Mr. Vincy, pettishly.  "I tell you the lad's
an unlucky lad, Lucy.  And you've always spoiled him."

"Well, Vincy, he was my first, and you made a fine fuss with him when
he came.  You were as proud as proud," said Mrs. Vincy, easily
recovering her cheerful smile.

"Who knows what babies will turn to?  I was fool enough, I dare say,"
said the husband--more mildly, however.

"But who has handsomer, better children than ours?  Fred is far beyond
other people's sons: you may hear it in his speech, that he has kept
college company.  And Rosamond--where is there a girl like her?  She
might stand beside any lady in the land, and only look the better for
it.  You see--Mr. Lydgate has kept the highest company and been
everywhere, and he fell in love with her at once.  Not but what I could
have wished Rosamond had not engaged herself.  She might have met
somebody on a visit who would have been a far better match; I mean at
her schoolfellow Miss Willoughby's. There are relations in that family
quite as high as Mr. Lydgate's."

"Damn relations!" said Mr. Vincy; "I've had enough of them.  I don't
want a son-in-law who has got nothing but his relations to recommend
him."

"Why, my dear," said Mrs. Vincy, "you seemed as pleased as could be
about it.  It's true, I wasn't at home; but Rosamond told me you hadn't
a word to say against the engagement.  And she has begun to buy in the
best linen and cambric for her underclothing."

"Not by my will," said Mr. Vincy.  "I shall have enough to do this
year, with an idle scamp of a son, without paying for wedding-clothes.
The times are as tight as can be; everybody is being ruined; and I
don't believe Lydgate has got a farthing.  I shan't give my consent to
their marrying.  Let 'em wait, as their elders have done before 'em."

"Rosamond will take it hard, Vincy, and you know you never could bear
to cross her."

"Yes, I could.  The sooner the engagement's off, the better.  I don't
believe he'll ever make an income, the way he goes on.  He makes
enemies; that's all I hear of his making."

"But he stands very high with Mr. Bulstrode, my dear.  The marriage
would please _him_, I should think."

"Please the deuce!" said Mr. Vincy.  "Bulstrode won't pay for their
keep.  And if Lydgate thinks I'm going to give money for them to set up
housekeeping, he's mistaken, that's all.  I expect I shall have to put
down my horses soon.  You'd better tell Rosy what I say."

This was a not infrequent procedure with Mr. Vincy--to be rash in
jovial assent, and on becoming subsequently conscious that he had been
rash, to employ others in making the offensive retractation.  However,
Mrs. Vincy, who never willingly opposed her husband, lost no time the
next morning in letting Rosamond know what he had said.  Rosamond,
examining some muslin-work, listened in silence, and at the end gave a
certain turn of her graceful neck, of which only long experience could
teach you that it meant perfect obstinacy.

"What do you say, my dear?" said her mother, with affectionate
deference.

"Papa does not mean anything of the kind," said Rosamond, quite calmly.
"He has always said that he wished me to marry the man I loved.  And I
shall marry Mr. Lydgate.  It is seven weeks now since papa gave his
consent.  And I hope we shall have Mrs. Bretton's house."

"Well, my dear, I shall leave you to manage your papa.  You always do
manage everybody.  But if we ever do go and get damask, Sadler's is the
place--far better than Hopkins's. Mrs. Bretton's is very large, though:
I should love you to have such a house; but it will take a great deal
of furniture--carpeting and everything, besides plate and glass.  And
you hear, your papa says he will give no money.  Do you think Mr.
Lydgate expects it?"

"You cannot imagine that I should ask him, mamma.  Of course he
understands his own affairs."

"But he may have been looking for money, my dear, and we all thought of
your having a pretty legacy as well as Fred;--and now everything is so
dreadful--there's no pleasure in thinking of anything, with that poor
boy disappointed as he is."

"That has nothing to do with my marriage, mamma.  Fred must leave off
being idle.  I am going up-stairs to take this work to Miss Morgan: she
does the open hemming very well.  Mary Garth might do some work for me
now, I should think.  Her sewing is exquisite; it is the nicest thing I
know about Mary.  I should so like to have all my cambric frilling
double-hemmed. And it takes a long time."

Mrs. Vincy's belief that Rosamond could manage her papa was well
founded.  Apart from his dinners and his coursing, Mr. Vincy,
blustering as he was, had as little of his own way as if he had been a
prime minister: the force of circumstances was easily too much for him,
as it is for most pleasure-loving florid men; and the circumstance
called Rosamond was particularly forcible by means of that mild
persistence which, as we know, enables a white soft living substance to
make its way in spite of opposing rock.  Papa was not a rock: he had no
other fixity than that fixity of alternating impulses sometimes called
habit, and this was altogether unfavorable to his taking the only
decisive line of conduct in relation to his daughter's
engagement--namely, to inquire thoroughly into Lydgate's circumstances,
declare his own inability to furnish money, and forbid alike either a
speedy marriage or an engagement which must be too lengthy.  That seems
very simple and easy in the statement; but a disagreeable resolve
formed in the chill hours of the morning had as many conditions against
it as the early frost, and rarely persisted under the warming
influences of the day.  The indirect though emphatic expression of
opinion to which Mr. Vincy was prone suffered much restraint in this
case: Lydgate was a proud man towards whom innuendoes were obviously
unsafe, and throwing his hat on the floor was out of the question.  Mr.
Vincy was a little in awe of him, a little vain that he wanted to marry
Rosamond, a little indisposed to raise a question of money in which his
own position was not advantageous, a little afraid of being worsted in
dialogue with a man better educated and more highly bred than himself,
and a little afraid of doing what his daughter would not like.  The
part Mr. Vincy preferred playing was that of the generous host whom
nobody criticises.  In the earlier half of the day there was business
to hinder any formal communication of an adverse resolve; in the later
there was dinner, wine, whist, and general satisfaction.  And in the
mean while the hours were each leaving their little deposit and
gradually forming the final reason for inaction, namely, that action
was too late.  The accepted lover spent most of his evenings in Lowick
Gate, and a love-making not at all dependent on money-advances from
fathers-in-law, or prospective income from a profession, went on
flourishingly under Mr. Vincy's own eyes.  Young love-making--that
gossamer web!  Even the points it clings to--the things whence its
subtle interlacings are swung--are scarcely perceptible: momentary
touches of fingertips, meetings of rays from blue and dark orbs,
unfinished phrases, lightest changes of cheek and lip, faintest
tremors.  The web itself is made of spontaneous beliefs and indefinable
joys, yearnings of one life towards another, visions of completeness,
indefinite trust.  And Lydgate fell to spinning that web from his
inward self with wonderful rapidity, in spite of experience supposed to
be finished off with the drama of Laure--in spite too of medicine and
biology; for the inspection of macerated muscle or of eyes presented in
a dish (like Santa Lucia's), and other incidents of scientific inquiry,
are observed to be less incompatible with poetic love than a native
dulness or a lively addiction to the lowest prose.  As for Rosamond,
she was in the water-lily's expanding wonderment at its own fuller
life, and she too was spinning industriously at the mutual web.  All
this went on in the corner of the drawing-room where the piano stood,
and subtle as it was, the light made it a sort of rainbow visible to
many observers besides Mr. Farebrother.  The certainty that Miss Vincy
and Mr. Lydgate were engaged became general in Middlemarch without the
aid of formal announcement.

Aunt Bulstrode was again stirred to anxiety; but this time she
addressed herself to her brother, going to the warehouse expressly to
avoid Mrs. Vincy's volatility.  His replies were not satisfactory.

"Walter, you never mean to tell me that you have allowed all this to go
on without inquiry into Mr. Lydgate's prospects?" said Mrs. Bulstrode,
opening her eyes with wider gravity at her brother, who was in his
peevish warehouse humor.  "Think of this girl brought up in luxury--in
too worldly a way, I am sorry to say--what will she do on a small
income?"

"Oh, confound it, Harriet! What can I do when men come into the town
without any asking of mine?  Did you shut your house up against
Lydgate?  Bulstrode has pushed him forward more than anybody.  I never
made any fuss about the young fellow.  You should go and talk to your
husband about it, not me."

"Well, really, Walter, how can Mr. Bulstrode be to blame?  I am sure he
did not wish for the engagement."

"Oh, if Bulstrode had not taken him by the hand, I should never have
invited him."

"But you called him in to attend on Fred, and I am sure that was a
mercy," said Mrs. Bulstrode, losing her clew in the intricacies of the
subject.

"I don't know about mercy," said Mr. Vincy, testily.  "I know I am
worried more than I like with my family.  I was a good brother to you,
Harriet, before you married Bulstrode, and I must say he doesn't always
show that friendly spirit towards your family that might have been
expected of him."  Mr. Vincy was very little like a Jesuit, but no
accomplished Jesuit could have turned a question more adroitly.
Harriet had to defend her husband instead of blaming her brother, and
the conversation ended at a point as far from the beginning as some
recent sparring between the brothers-in-law at a vestry meeting.

Mrs. Bulstrode did not repeat her brother's complaints to her husband,
but in the evening she spoke to him of Lydgate and Rosamond.  He did
not share her warm interest, however; and only spoke with resignation
of the risks attendant on the beginning of medical practice and the
desirability of prudence.

"I am sure we are bound to pray for that thoughtless girl--brought up
as she has been," said Mrs. Bulstrode, wishing to rouse her husband's
feelings.

"Truly, my dear," said Mr. Bulstrode, assentingly.  "Those who are not
of this world can do little else to arrest the errors of the
obstinately worldly.  That is what we must accustom ourselves to
recognize with regard to your brother's family.  I could have wished
that Mr. Lydgate had not entered into such a union; but my relations
with him are limited to that use of his gifts for God's purposes which
is taught us by the divine government under each dispensation."

Mrs. Bulstrode said no more, attributing some dissatisfaction which she
felt to her own want of spirituality.  She believed that her husband
was one of those men whose memoirs should be written when they died.

As to Lydgate himself, having been accepted, he was prepared to accept
all the consequences which he believed himself to foresee with perfect
clearness.  Of course he must be married in a year--perhaps even in
half a year.  This was not what he had intended; but other schemes
would not be hindered: they would simply adjust themselves anew.
Marriage, of course, must be prepared for in the usual way.  A house
must be taken instead of the rooms he at present occupied; and Lydgate,
having heard Rosamond speak with admiration of old Mrs. Bretton's house
(situated in Lowick Gate), took notice when it fell vacant after the
old lady's death, and immediately entered into treaty for it.

He did this in an episodic way, very much as he gave orders to his
tailor for every requisite of perfect dress, without any notion of
being extravagant.  On the contrary, he would have despised any
ostentation of expense; his profession had familiarized him with all
grades of poverty, and he cared much for those who suffered hardships.
He would have behaved perfectly at a table where the sauce was served
in a jug with the handle off, and he would have remembered nothing
about a grand dinner except that a man was there who talked well.  But
it had never occurred to him that he should live in any other than what
he would have called an ordinary way, with green glasses for hock, and
excellent waiting at table.  In warming himself at French social
theories he had brought away no smell of scorching.  We may handle even
extreme opinions with impunity while our furniture, our dinner-giving,
and preference for armorial bearings in our own case, link us
indissolubly with the established order.  And Lydgate's tendency was
not towards extreme opinions: he would have liked no barefooted
doctrines, being particular about his boots: he was no radical in
relation to anything but medical reform and the prosecution of
discovery.  In the rest of practical life he walked by hereditary
habit; half from that personal pride and unreflecting egoism which I
have already called commonness, and half from that naivete which
belonged to preoccupation with favorite ideas.

Any inward debate Lydgate had as to the consequences of this engagement
which had stolen upon him, turned on the paucity of time rather than of
money.  Certainly, being in love and being expected continually by some
one who always turned out to be prettier than memory could represent
her to be, did interfere with the diligent use of spare hours which
might serve some "plodding fellow of a German" to make the great,
imminent discovery.  This was really an argument for not deferring the
marriage too long, as he implied to Mr. Farebrother, one day that the
Vicar came to his room with some pond-products which he wanted to
examine under a better microscope than his own, and, finding Lydgate's
tableful of apparatus and specimens in confusion, said sarcastically--

"Eros has degenerated; he began by introducing order and harmony, and
now he brings back chaos."

"Yes, at some stages," said Lydgate, lifting his brows and smiling,
while he began to arrange his microscope.  "But a better order will
begin after."

"Soon?" said the Vicar.

"I hope so, really.  This unsettled state of affairs uses up the time,
and when one has notions in science, every moment is an opportunity.  I
feel sure that marriage must be the best thing for a man who wants to
work steadily.  He has everything at home then--no teasing with
personal speculations--he can get calmness and freedom."

"You are an enviable dog," said the Vicar, "to have such a
prospect--Rosamond, calmness and freedom, all to your share.  Here am
I with nothing but my pipe and pond-animalcules. Now, are you ready?"

Lydgate did not mention to the Vicar another reason he had for wishing
to shorten the period of courtship.  It was rather irritating to him,
even with the wine of love in his veins, to be obliged to mingle so
often with the family party at the Vincys', and to enter so much into
Middlemarch gossip, protracted good cheer, whist-playing, and general
futility.  He had to be deferential when Mr. Vincy decided questions
with trenchant ignorance, especially as to those liquors which were the
best inward pickle, preserving you from the effects of bad air.  Mrs.
Vincy's openness and simplicity were quite unstreaked with suspicion as
to the subtle offence she might give to the taste of her intended
son-in-law; and altogether Lydgate had to confess to himself that he
was descending a little in relation to Rosamond's family.  But that
exquisite creature herself suffered in the same sort of way:--it was
at least one delightful thought that in marrying her, he could give her
a much-needed transplantation.

"Dear!" he said to her one evening, in his gentlest tone, as he sat
down by her and looked closely at her face--

But I must first say that he had found her alone in the drawing-room,
where the great old-fashioned window, almost as large as the side of
the room, was opened to the summer scents of the garden at the back of
the house.  Her father and mother were gone to a party, and the rest
were all out with the butterflies.

"Dear! your eyelids are red."

"Are they?" said Rosamond.  "I wonder why."  It was not in her nature
to pour forth wishes or grievances.  They only came forth gracefully on
solicitation.

"As if you could hide it from me!" said Lydgate, laying his hand
tenderly on both of hers.  "Don't I see a tiny drop on one of the
lashes?  Things trouble you, and you don't tell me.  That is unloving."

"Why should I tell you what you cannot alter?  They are every-day
things:--perhaps they have been a little worse lately."

"Family annoyances.  Don't fear speaking.  I guess them."

"Papa has been more irritable lately.  Fred makes him angry, and this
morning there was a fresh quarrel because Fred threatens to throw his
whole education away, and do something quite beneath him.  And
besides--"

Rosamond hesitated, and her cheeks were gathering a slight flush.
Lydgate had never seen her in trouble since the morning of their
engagement, and he had never felt so passionately towards her as at
this moment.  He kissed the hesitating lips gently, as if to encourage
them.

"I feel that papa is not quite pleased about our engagement," Rosamond
continued, almost in a whisper; "and he said last night that he should
certainly speak to you and say it must be given up."

"Will you give it up?" said Lydgate, with quick energy--almost angrily.

"I never give up anything that I choose to do," said Rosamond,
recovering her calmness at the touching of this chord.

"God bless you!" said Lydgate, kissing her again.  This constancy of
purpose in the right place was adorable.  He went on:--

"It is too late now for your father to say that our engagement must be
given up.  You are of age, and I claim you as mine.  If anything is
done to make you unhappy,--that is a reason for hastening our marriage."

An unmistakable delight shone forth from the blue eyes that met his,
and the radiance seemed to light up all his future with mild sunshine.
Ideal happiness (of the kind known in the Arabian Nights, in which you
are invited to step from the labor and discord of the street into a
paradise where everything is given to you and nothing claimed) seemed
to be an affair of a few weeks' waiting, more or less.

"Why should we defer it?" he said, with ardent insistence.  "I have
taken the house now: everything else can soon be got ready--can it
not?  You will not mind about new clothes.  Those can be bought
afterwards."

"What original notions you clever men have!" said Rosamond, dimpling
with more thorough laughter than usual at this humorous incongruity.
"This is the first time I ever heard of wedding-clothes being bought
after marriage."

"But you don't mean to say you would insist on my waiting months for
the sake of clothes?" said Lydgate, half thinking that Rosamond was
tormenting him prettily, and half fearing that she really shrank from
speedy marriage.  "Remember, we are looking forward to a better sort of
happiness even than this--being continually together, independent of
others, and ordering our lives as we will.  Come, dear, tell me how
soon you can be altogether mine."

There was a serious pleading in Lydgate's tone, as if he felt that she
would be injuring him by any fantastic delays.  Rosamond became serious
too, and slightly meditative; in fact, she was going through many
intricacies of lace-edging and hosiery and petticoat-tucking, in order
to give an answer that would at least be approximative.

"Six weeks would be ample--say so, Rosamond," insisted Lydgate,
releasing her hands to put his arm gently round her.

One little hand immediately went to pat her hair, while she gave her
neck a meditative turn, and then said seriously--

"There would be the house-linen and the furniture to be prepared.
Still, mamma could see to those while we were away."

"Yes, to be sure.  We must be away a week or so."

"Oh, more than that!" said Rosamond, earnestly.  She was thinking of
her evening dresses for the visit to Sir Godwin Lydgate's, which she
had long been secretly hoping for as a delightful employment of at
least one quarter of the honeymoon, even if she deferred her
introduction to the uncle who was a doctor of divinity (also a pleasing
though sober kind of rank, when sustained by blood). She looked at her
lover with some wondering remonstrance as she spoke, and he readily
understood that she might wish to lengthen the sweet time of double
solitude.

"Whatever you wish, my darling, when the day is fixed.  But let us take
a decided course, and put an end to any discomfort you may be
suffering.  Six weeks!--I am sure they would be ample."

"I could certainly hasten the work," said Rosamond.  "Will you, then,
mention it to papa?--I think it would be better to write to him." She
blushed and looked at him as the garden flowers look at us when we walk
forth happily among them in the transcendent evening light: is there
not a soul beyond utterance, half nymph, half child, in those delicate
petals which glow and breathe about the centres of deep color?

He touched her ear and a little bit of neck under it with his lips, and
they sat quite still for many minutes which flowed by them like a small
gurgling brook with the kisses of the sun upon it.  Rosamond thought
that no one could be more in love than she was; and Lydgate thought
that after all his wild mistakes and absurd credulity, he had found
perfect womanhood--felt as if already breathed upon by exquisite wedded
affection such as would be bestowed by an accomplished creature who
venerated his high musings and momentous labors and would never
interfere with them; who would create order in the home and accounts
with still magic, yet keep her fingers ready to touch the lute and
transform life into romance at any moment; who was instructed to the
true womanly limit and not a hair's-breadth beyond--docile, therefore,
and ready to carry out behests which came from that limit.  It was
plainer now than ever that his notion of remaining much longer a
bachelor had been a mistake: marriage would not be an obstruction but a
furtherance.  And happening the next day to accompany a patient to
Brassing, he saw a dinner-service there which struck him as so exactly
the right thing that he bought it at once.  It saved time to do these
things just when you thought of them, and Lydgate hated ugly crockery.
The dinner-service in question was expensive, but that might be in the
nature of dinner-services. Furnishing was necessarily expensive; but
then it had to be done only once.

"It must be lovely," said Mrs. Vincy, when Lydgate mentioned his
purchase with some descriptive touches.  "Just what Rosy ought to have.
I trust in heaven it won't be broken!"

"One must hire servants who will not break things," said Lydgate.
(Certainly, this was reasoning with an imperfect vision of sequences.
But at that period there was no sort of reasoning which was not more or
less sanctioned by men of science.)

Of course it was unnecessary to defer the mention of anything to mamma,
who did not readily take views that were not cheerful, and being a
happy wife herself, had hardly any feeling but pride in her daughter's
marriage.  But Rosamond had good reasons for suggesting to Lydgate that
papa should be appealed to in writing.  She prepared for the arrival of
the letter by walking with her papa to the warehouse the next morning,
and telling him on the way that Mr. Lydgate wished to be married soon.

"Nonsense, my dear!" said Mr. Vincy.  "What has he got to marry on?
You'd much better give up the engagement.  I've told you so pretty
plainly before this.  What have you had such an education for, if you
are to go and marry a poor man?  It's a cruel thing for a father to
see."

"Mr. Lydgate is not poor, papa.  He bought Mr. Peacock's practice,
which, they say, is worth eight or nine hundred a-year."

"Stuff and nonsense!  What's buying a practice?  He might as well buy
next year's swallows.  It'll all slip through his fingers."

"On the contrary, papa, he will increase the practice.  See how he has
been called in by the Chettams and Casaubons."

"I hope he knows I shan't give anything--with this disappointment about
Fred, and Parliament going to be dissolved, and machine-breaking
everywhere, and an election coming on--"

"Dear papa! what can that have to do with my marriage?"

"A pretty deal to do with it!  We may all be ruined for what I know--the
country's in that state!  Some say it's the end of the world, and
be hanged if I don't think it looks like it!  Anyhow, it's not a time
for me to be drawing money out of my business, and I should wish
Lydgate to know that."

"I am sure he expects nothing, papa.  And he has such very high
connections: he is sure to rise in one way or another.  He is engaged
in making scientific discoveries."

Mr. Vincy was silent.

"I cannot give up my only prospect of happiness, papa. Mr. Lydgate is a
gentleman.  I could never love any one who was not a perfect gentleman.
You would not like me to go into a consumption, as Arabella Hawley did.
And you know that I never change my mind."

Again papa was silent.

"Promise me, papa, that you will consent to what we wish.  We shall
never give each other up; and you know that you have always objected to
long courtships and late marriages."

There was a little more urgency of this kind, till Mr. Vincy said,
"Well, well, child, he must write to me first before I can answer
him,"--and Rosamond was certain that she had gained her point.

Mr. Vincy's answer consisted chiefly in a demand that Lydgate should
insure his life--a demand immediately conceded.  This was a
delightfully reassuring idea supposing that Lydgate died, but in the
mean time not a self-supporting idea.  However, it seemed to make
everything comfortable about Rosamond's marriage; and the necessary
purchases went on with much spirit.  Not without prudential
considerations, however.  A bride (who is going to visit at a
baronet's) must have a few first-rate pocket-handkerchiefs; but beyond
the absolutely necessary half-dozen, Rosamond contented herself without
the very highest style of embroidery and Valenciennes.  Lydgate also,
finding that his sum of eight hundred pounds had been considerably
reduced since he had come to Middlemarch, restrained his inclination
for some plate of an old pattern which was shown to him when he went
into Kibble's establishment at Brassing to buy forks and spoons.  He
was too proud to act as if he presupposed that Mr. Vincy would advance
money to provide furniture; and though, since it would not be
necessary to pay for everything at once, some bills would be left
standing over, he did not waste time in conjecturing how much his
father-in-law would give in the form of dowry, to make payment easy.
He was not going to do anything extravagant, but the requisite things
must be bought, and it would be bad economy to buy them of a poor
quality.  All these matters were by the bye.  Lydgate foresaw that
science and his profession were the objects he should alone pursue
enthusiastically; but he could not imagine himself pursuing them in
such a home as Wrench had--the doors all open, the oil-cloth worn, the
children in soiled pinafores, and lunch lingering in the form of bones,
black-handled knives, and willow-pattern. But Wrench had a wretched
lymphatic wife who made a mummy of herself indoors in a large shawl;
and he must have altogether begun with an ill-chosen domestic apparatus.

Rosamond, however, was on her side much occupied with conjectures,
though her quick imitative perception warned her against betraying them
too crudely.

"I shall like so much to know your family," she said one day, when the
wedding journey was being discussed.  "We might perhaps take a
direction that would allow us to see them as we returned.  Which of
your uncles do you like best?"

"Oh,--my uncle Godwin, I think.  He is a good-natured old fellow."

"You were constantly at his house at Quallingham, when you were a boy,
were you not?  I should so like to see the old spot and everything you
were used to.  Does he know you are going to be married?"

"No," said Lydgate, carelessly, turning in his chair and rubbing his
hair up.

"Do send him word of it, you naughty undutiful nephew.  He will perhaps
ask you to take me to Quallingham; and then you could show me about the
grounds, and I could imagine you there when you were a boy.  Remember,
you see me in my home, just as it has been since I was a child.  It is
not fair that I should be so ignorant of yours.  But perhaps you would
be a little ashamed of me.  I forgot that."

Lydgate smiled at her tenderly, and really accepted the suggestion that
the proud pleasure of showing so charming a bride was worth some
trouble.  And now he came to think of it, he would like to see the old
spots with Rosamond.

"I will write to him, then.  But my cousins are bores."

It seemed magnificent to Rosamond to be able to speak so slightingly of
a baronet's family, and she felt much contentment in the prospect of
being able to estimate them contemptuously on her own account.

But mamma was near spoiling all, a day or two later, by saying--

"I hope your uncle Sir Godwin will not look down on Rosy, Mr. Lydgate.
I should think he would do something handsome.  A thousand or two can
be nothing to a baronet."

"Mamma!" said Rosamond, blushing deeply; and Lydgate pitied her so much
that he remained silent and went to the other end of the room to
examine a print curiously, as if he had been absent-minded. Mamma had a
little filial lecture afterwards, and was docile as usual.  But
Rosamond reflected that if any of those high-bred cousins who were
bores, should be induced to visit Middlemarch, they would see many
things in her own family which might shock them.  Hence it seemed
desirable that Lydgate should by-and-by get some first-rate position
elsewhere than in Middlemarch; and this could hardly be difficult in
the case of a man who had a titled uncle and could make discoveries.
Lydgate, you perceive, had talked fervidly to Rosamond of his hopes as
to the highest uses of his life, and had found it delightful to be
listened to by a creature who would bring him the sweet furtherance of
satisfying affection--beauty--repose--such help as our thoughts get
from the summer sky and the flower-fringed meadows.

Lydgate relied much on the psychological difference between what for
the sake of variety I will call goose and gander: especially on the
innate submissiveness of the goose as beautifully corresponding to the
strength of the gander.



CHAPTER XXXVII.

    "Thrice happy she that is so well assured
     Unto herself and settled so in heart
     That neither will for better be allured
     Ne fears to worse with any chance to start,
     But like a steddy ship doth strongly part
     The raging waves and keeps her course aright;
     Ne aught for tempest doth from it depart,
     Ne aught for fairer weather's false delight.
     Such self-assurance need not fear the spight
     Of grudging foes; ne favour seek of friends;
     But in the stay of her own stedfast might
     Neither to one herself nor other bends.
        Most happy she that most assured doth rest,
        But he most happy who such one loves best."
                                               --SPENSER.


The doubt hinted by Mr. Vincy whether it were only the general election
or the end of the world that was coming on, now that George the Fourth
was dead, Parliament dissolved, Wellington and Peel generally
depreciated and the new King apologetic, was a feeble type of the
uncertainties in provincial opinion at that time.  With the glow-worm
lights of country places, how could men see which were their own
thoughts in the confusion of a Tory Ministry passing Liberal measures,
of Tory nobles and electors being anxious to return Liberals rather
than friends of the recreant Ministers, and of outcries for remedies
which seemed to have a mysteriously remote bearing on private interest,
and were made suspicious by the advocacy of disagreeable neighbors?
Buyers of the Middlemarch newspapers found themselves in an anomalous
position: during the agitation on the Catholic Question many had given
up the "Pioneer"--which had a motto from Charles James Fox and was in
the van of progress--because it had taken Peel's side about the
Papists, and had thus blotted its Liberalism with a toleration of
Jesuitry and Baal; but they were ill-satisfied with the "Trumpet,"
which--since its blasts against Rome, and in the general flaccidity of
the public mind (nobody knowing who would support whom)--had become
feeble in its blowing.

It was a time, according to a noticeable article in the "Pioneer," when
the crying needs of the country might well counteract a reluctance to
public action on the part of men whose minds had from long experience
acquired breadth as well as concentration, decision of judgment as well
as tolerance, dispassionateness as well as energy--in fact, all those
qualities which in the melancholy experience of mankind have been the
least disposed to share lodgings.

Mr. Hackbutt, whose fluent speech was at that time floating more widely
than usual, and leaving much uncertainty as to its ultimate channel,
was heard to say in Mr. Hawley's office that the article in question
"emanated" from Brooke of Tipton, and that Brooke had secretly bought
the "Pioneer" some months ago.

"That means mischief, eh?" said Mr. Hawley.  "He's got the freak of
being a popular man now, after dangling about like a stray tortoise.
So much the worse for him.  I've had my eye on him for some time.  He
shall be prettily pumped upon.  He's a damned bad landlord.  What
business has an old county man to come currying favor with a low set of
dark-blue freemen?  As to his paper, I only hope he may do the writing
himself.  It would be worth our paying for."

"I understand he has got a very brilliant young fellow to edit it, who
can write the highest style of leading article, quite equal to anything
in the London papers.  And he means to take very high ground on Reform."

"Let Brooke reform his rent-roll. He's a cursed old screw, and the
buildings all over his estate are going to rack.  I suppose this young
fellow is some loose fish from London."

"His name is Ladislaw.  He is said to be of foreign extraction."

"I know the sort," said Mr. Hawley; "some emissary.  He'll begin with
flourishing about the Rights of Man and end with murdering a wench.
That's the style."

"You must concede that there are abuses, Hawley," said Mr. Hackbutt,
foreseeing some political disagreement with his family lawyer.  "I
myself should never favor immoderate views--in fact I take my stand
with Huskisson--but I cannot blind myself to the consideration that the
non-representation of large towns--"

"Large towns be damned!" said Mr. Hawley, impatient of exposition.  "I
know a little too much about Middlemarch elections.  Let 'em quash
every pocket borough to-morrow, and bring in every mushroom town in the
kingdom--they'll only increase the expense of getting into Parliament.
I go upon facts."

Mr. Hawley's disgust at the notion of the "Pioneer" being edited by an
emissary, and of Brooke becoming actively political--as if a tortoise
of desultory pursuits should protrude its small head ambitiously and
become rampant--was hardly equal to the annoyance felt by some members
of Mr. Brooke's own family.  The result had oozed forth gradually, like
the discovery that your neighbor has set up an unpleasant kind of
manufacture which will be permanently under your nostrils without legal
remedy.  The "Pioneer" had been secretly bought even before Will
Ladislaw's arrival, the expected opportunity having offered itself in
the readiness of the proprietor to part with a valuable property which
did not pay; and in the interval since Mr. Brooke had written his
invitation, those germinal ideas of making his mind tell upon the world
at large which had been present in him from his younger years, but had
hitherto lain in some obstruction, had been sprouting under cover.

The development was much furthered by a delight in his guest which
proved greater even than he had anticipated.  For it seemed that Will
was not only at home in all those artistic and literary subjects which
Mr. Brooke had gone into at one time, but that he was strikingly ready
at seizing the points of the political situation, and dealing with them
in that large spirit which, aided by adequate memory, lends itself to
quotation and general effectiveness of treatment.

"He seems to me a kind of Shelley, you know," Mr. Brooke took an
opportunity of saying, for the gratification of Mr. Casaubon.  "I don't
mean as to anything objectionable--laxities or atheism, or anything of
that kind, you know--Ladislaw's sentiments in every way I am sure are
good--indeed, we were talking a great deal together last night.  But he
has the same sort of enthusiasm for liberty, freedom, emancipation--a
fine thing under guidance--under guidance, you know.  I think I shall
be able to put him on the right tack; and I am the more pleased because
he is a relation of yours, Casaubon."

If the right tack implied anything more precise than the rest of Mr.
Brooke's speech, Mr. Casaubon silently hoped that it referred to some
occupation at a great distance from Lowick.  He had disliked Will while
he helped him, but he had begun to dislike him still more now that Will
had declined his help.  That is the way with us when we have any uneasy
jealousy in our disposition: if our talents are chiefly of the
burrowing kind, our honey-sipping cousin (whom we have grave reasons
for objecting to) is likely to have a secret contempt for us, and any
one who admires him passes an oblique criticism on ourselves.  Having
the scruples of rectitude in our souls, we are above the meanness of
injuring him--rather we meet all his claims on us by active benefits;
and the drawing of cheques for him, being a superiority which he must
recognize, gives our bitterness a milder infusion.  Now Mr. Casaubon
had been deprived of that superiority (as anything more than a
remembrance) in a sudden, capricious manner.  His antipathy to Will did
not spring from the common jealousy of a winter-worn husband: it was
something deeper, bred by his lifelong claims and discontents; but
Dorothea, now that she was present--Dorothea, as a young wife who
herself had shown an offensive capability of criticism, necessarily
gave concentration to the uneasiness which had before been vague.

Will Ladislaw on his side felt that his dislike was flourishing at the
expense of his gratitude, and spent much inward discourse in justifying
the dislike.  Casaubon hated him--he knew that very well; on his first
entrance he could discern a bitterness in the mouth and a venom in the
glance which would almost justify declaring war in spite of past
benefits.  He was much obliged to Casaubon in the past, but really the
act of marrying this wife was a set-off against the obligation.  It was
a question whether gratitude which refers to what is done for one's
self ought not to give way to indignation at what is done against
another.  And Casaubon had done a wrong to Dorothea in marrying her.  A
man was bound to know himself better than that, and if he chose to grow
gray crunching bones in a cavern, he had no business to be luring a
girl into his companionship.  "It is the most horrible of
virgin-sacrifices," said Will; and he painted to himself what were
Dorothea's inward sorrows as if he had been writing a choric wail.  But
he would never lose sight of her: he would watch over her--if he gave
up everything else in life he would watch over her, and she should know
that she had one slave in the world, Will had--to use Sir Thomas
Browne's phrase--a "passionate prodigality" of statement both to
himself and others.  The simple truth was that nothing then invited him
so strongly as the presence of Dorothea.

Invitations of the formal kind had been wanting, however, for Will had
never been asked to go to Lowick.  Mr. Brooke, indeed, confident of
doing everything agreeable which Casaubon, poor fellow, was too much
absorbed to think of, had arranged to bring Ladislaw to Lowick several
times (not neglecting meanwhile to introduce him elsewhere on every
opportunity as "a young relative of Casaubon's"). And though Will had
not seen Dorothea alone, their interviews had been enough to restore
her former sense of young companionship with one who was cleverer than
herself, yet seemed ready to be swayed by her.  Poor Dorothea before
her marriage had never found much room in other minds for what she
cared most to say; and she had not, as we know, enjoyed her husband's
superior instruction so much as she had expected.  If she spoke with
any keenness of interest to Mr. Casaubon, he heard her with an air of
patience as if she had given a quotation from the Delectus familiar to
him from his tender years, and sometimes mentioned curtly what ancient
sects or personages had held similar ideas, as if there were too much
of that sort in stock already; at other times he would inform her that
she was mistaken, and reassert what her remark had questioned.

But Will Ladislaw always seemed to see more in what she said than she
herself saw.  Dorothea had little vanity, but she had the ardent
woman's need to rule beneficently by making the joy of another soul.
Hence the mere chance of seeing Will occasionally was like a lunette
opened in the wall of her prison, giving her a glimpse of the sunny
air; and this pleasure began to nullify her original alarm at what her
husband might think about the introduction of Will as her uncle's
guest.  On this subject Mr. Casaubon had remained dumb.

But Will wanted to talk with Dorothea alone, and was impatient of slow
circumstance.  However slight the terrestrial intercourse between Dante
and Beatrice or Petrarch and Laura, time changes the proportion of
things, and in later days it is preferable to have fewer sonnets and
more conversation.  Necessity excused stratagem, but stratagem was
limited by the dread of offending Dorothea.  He found out at last that
he wanted to take a particular sketch at Lowick; and one morning when
Mr. Brooke had to drive along the Lowick road on his way to the county
town, Will asked to be set down with his sketch-book and camp-stool at
Lowick, and without announcing himself at the Manor settled himself to
sketch in a position where he must see Dorothea if she came out to
walk--and he knew that she usually walked an hour in the morning.

But the stratagem was defeated by the weather.  Clouds gathered with
treacherous quickness, the rain came down, and Will was obliged to take
shelter in the house.  He intended, on the strength of relationship, to
go into the drawing-room and wait there without being announced; and
seeing his old acquaintance the butler in the hall, he said, "Don't
mention that I am here, Pratt; I will wait till luncheon; I know Mr.
Casaubon does not like to be disturbed when he is in the library."

"Master is out, sir; there's only Mrs. Casaubon in the library.  I'd
better tell her you're here, sir," said Pratt, a red-cheeked man given
to lively converse with Tantripp, and often agreeing with her that it
must be dull for Madam.

"Oh, very well; this confounded rain has hindered me from sketching,"
said Will, feeling so happy that he affected indifference with
delightful ease.

In another minute he was in the library, and Dorothea was meeting him
with her sweet unconstrained smile.

"Mr. Casaubon has gone to the Archdeacon's," she said, at once.  "I
don't know whether he will be at home again long before dinner.  He was
uncertain how long he should be.  Did you want to say anything
particular to him?"

"No; I came to sketch, but the rain drove me in.  Else I would not have
disturbed you yet.  I supposed that Mr. Casaubon was here, and I know
he dislikes interruption at this hour."

"I am indebted to the rain, then.  I am so glad to see you." Dorothea
uttered these common words with the simple sincerity of an unhappy
child, visited at school.

"I really came for the chance of seeing you alone," said Will,
mysteriously forced to be just as simple as she was.  He could not stay
to ask himself, why not?  "I wanted to talk about things, as we did in
Rome.  It always makes a difference when other people are present."

"Yes," said Dorothea, in her clear full tone of assent.  "Sit down."
She seated herself on a dark ottoman with the brown books behind her,
looking in her plain dress of some thin woollen-white material, without
a single ornament on her besides her wedding-ring, as if she were under
a vow to be different from all other women; and Will sat down opposite
her at two yards' distance, the light falling on his bright curls and
delicate but rather petulant profile, with its defiant curves of lip
and chin.  Each looked at the other as if they had been two flowers
which had opened then and there.  Dorothea for the moment forgot her
husband's mysterious irritation against Will: it seemed fresh water at
her thirsty lips to speak without fear to the one person whom she had
found receptive; for in looking backward through sadness she
exaggerated a past solace.

"I have often thought that I should like to talk to you again," she
said, immediately.  "It seems strange to me how many things I said to
you."

"I remember them all," said Will, with the unspeakable content in his
soul of feeling that he was in the presence of a creature worthy to be
perfectly loved.  I think his own feelings at that moment were perfect,
for we mortals have our divine moments, when love is satisfied in the
completeness of the beloved object.

"I have tried to learn a great deal since we were in Rome," said
Dorothea.  "I can read Latin a little, and I am beginning to understand
just a little Greek.  I can help Mr. Casaubon better now.  I can find
out references for him and save his eyes in many ways.  But it is very
difficult to be learned; it seems as if people were worn out on the way
to great thoughts, and can never enjoy them because they are too tired."

"If a man has a capacity for great thoughts, he is likely to overtake
them before he is decrepit," said Will, with irrepressible quickness.
But through certain sensibilities Dorothea was as quick as he, and
seeing her face change, he added, immediately, "But it is quite true
that the best minds have been sometimes overstrained in working out
their ideas."

"You correct me," said Dorothea.  "I expressed myself ill.  I should
have said that those who have great thoughts get too much worn in
working them out.  I used to feel about that, even when I was a little
girl; and it always seemed to me that the use I should like to make of
my life would be to help some one who did great works, so that his
burthen might be lighter."

Dorothea was led on to this bit of autobiography without any sense of
making a revelation.  But she had never before said anything to Will
which threw so strong a light on her marriage.  He did not shrug his
shoulders; and for want of that muscular outlet he thought the more
irritably of beautiful lips kissing holy skulls and other emptinesses
ecclesiastically enshrined.  Also he had to take care that his speech
should not betray that thought.

"But you may easily carry the help too far," he said, "and get
over-wrought yourself.  Are you not too much shut up?  You already look
paler.  It would be better for Mr. Casaubon to have a secretary; he
could easily get a man who would do half his work for him.  It would
save him more effectually, and you need only help him in lighter ways."

"How can you think of that?" said Dorothea, in a tone of earnest
remonstrance.  "I should have no happiness if I did not help him in his
work.  What could I do?  There is no good to be done in Lowick.  The
only thing I desire is to help him more.  And he objects to a
secretary: please not to mention that again."

"Certainly not, now I know your feeling.  But I have heard both Mr.
Brooke and Sir James Chettam express the same wish."

"Yes?" said Dorothea, "but they don't understand--they want me to be a
great deal on horseback, and have the garden altered and new
conservatories, to fill up my days.  I thought you could understand
that one's mind has other wants," she added, rather
impatiently--"besides, Mr. Casaubon cannot bear to hear of a secretary."

"My mistake is excusable," said Will.  "In old days I used to hear Mr.
Casaubon speak as if he looked forward to having a secretary.  Indeed
he held out the prospect of that office to me.  But I turned out to
be--not good enough for it."

Dorothea was trying to extract out of this an excuse for her husband's
evident repulsion, as she said, with a playful smile, "You were not a
steady worker enough."

"No," said Will, shaking his head backward somewhat after the manner of
a spirited horse.  And then, the old irritable demon prompting him to
give another good pinch at the moth-wings of poor Mr. Casaubon's glory,
he went on, "And I have seen since that Mr. Casaubon does not like any
one to overlook his work and know thoroughly what he is doing.  He is
too doubtful--too uncertain of himself.  I may not be good for much,
but he dislikes me because I disagree with him."

Will was not without his intentions to be always generous, but our
tongues are little triggers which have usually been pulled before
general intentions can be brought to bear.  And it was too intolerable
that Casaubon's dislike of him should not be fairly accounted for to
Dorothea.  Yet when he had spoken he was rather uneasy as to the effect
on her.

But Dorothea was strangely quiet--not immediately indignant, as she had
been on a like occasion in Rome.  And the cause lay deep.  She was no
longer struggling against the perception of facts, but adjusting
herself to their clearest perception; and now when she looked steadily
at her husband's failure, still more at his possible consciousness of
failure, she seemed to be looking along the one track where duty became
tenderness.  Will's want of reticence might have been met with more
severity, if he had not already been recommended to her mercy by her
husband's dislike, which must seem hard to her till she saw better
reason for it.

She did not answer at once, but after looking down ruminatingly she
said, with some earnestness, "Mr. Casaubon must have overcome his
dislike of you so far as his actions were concerned: and that is
admirable."

"Yes; he has shown a sense of justice in family matters.  It was an
abominable thing that my grandmother should have been disinherited
because she made what they called a mesalliance, though there was
nothing to be said against her husband except that he was a Polish
refugee who gave lessons for his bread."

"I wish I knew all about her!" said Dorothea.  "I wonder how she bore
the change from wealth to poverty: I wonder whether she was happy with
her husband!  Do you know much about them?"

"No; only that my grandfather was a patriot--a bright fellow--could
speak many languages--musical--got his bread by teaching all sorts of
things.  They both died rather early.  And I never knew much of my
father, beyond what my mother told me; but he inherited the musical
talents.  I remember his slow walk and his long thin hands; and one day
remains with me when he was lying ill, and I was very hungry, and had
only a little bit of bread."

"Ah, what a different life from mine!" said Dorothea, with keen
interest, clasping her hands on her lap.  "I have always had too much
of everything.  But tell me how it was--Mr. Casaubon could not have
known about you then."

"No; but my father had made himself known to Mr. Casaubon, and that was
my last hungry day.  My father died soon after, and my mother and I
were well taken care of.  Mr. Casaubon always expressly recognized it
as his duty to take care of us because of the harsh injustice which had
been shown to his mother's sister.  But now I am telling you what is
not new to you."

In his inmost soul Will was conscious of wishing to tell Dorothea what
was rather new even in his own construction of things--namely, that
Mr. Casaubon had never done more than pay a debt towards him.  Will was
much too good a fellow to be easy under the sense of being ungrateful.
And when gratitude has become a matter of reasoning there are many ways
of escaping from its bonds.

"No," answered Dorothea; "Mr. Casaubon has always avoided dwelling on
his own honorable actions."  She did not feel that her husband's
conduct was depreciated; but this notion of what justice had required
in his relations with Will Ladislaw took strong hold on her mind.
After a moment's pause, she added, "He had never told me that he
supported your mother.  Is she still living?"

"No; she died by an accident--a fall--four years ago.  It is curious
that my mother, too, ran away from her family, but not for the sake of
her husband.  She never would tell me anything about her family, except
that she forsook them to get her own living--went on the stage, in
fact.  She was a dark-eyed creature, with crisp ringlets, and never
seemed to be getting old.  You see I come of rebellious blood on both
sides," Will ended, smiling brightly at Dorothea, while she was still
looking with serious intentness before her, like a child seeing a drama
for the first time.

But her face, too, broke into a smile as she said, "That is your
apology, I suppose, for having yourself been rather rebellious; I mean,
to Mr. Casaubon's wishes.  You must remember that you have not done
what he thought best for you.  And if he dislikes you--you were
speaking of dislike a little while ago--but I should rather say, if he
has shown any painful feelings towards you, you must consider how
sensitive he has become from the wearing effect of study.  Perhaps,"
she continued, getting into a pleading tone, "my uncle has not told you
how serious Mr. Casaubon's illness was.  It would be very petty of us
who are well and can bear things, to think much of small offences from
those who carry a weight of trial."

"You teach me better," said Will.  "I will never grumble on that
subject again."  There was a gentleness in his tone which came from the
unutterable contentment of perceiving--what Dorothea was hardly
conscious of--that she was travelling into the remoteness of pure pity
and loyalty towards her husband.  Will was ready to adore her pity and
loyalty, if she would associate himself with her in manifesting them.
"I have really sometimes been a perverse fellow," he went on, "but I
will never again, if I can help it, do or say what you would
disapprove."

"That is very good of you," said Dorothea, with another open smile.  "I
shall have a little kingdom then, where I shall give laws.  But you
will soon go away, out of my rule, I imagine.  You will soon be tired
of staying at the Grange."

"That is a point I wanted to mention to you--one of the reasons why I
wished to speak to you alone.  Mr. Brooke proposes that I should stay
in this neighborhood.  He has bought one of the Middlemarch newspapers,
and he wishes me to conduct that, and also to help him in other ways."

"Would not that be a sacrifice of higher prospects for you?" said
Dorothea.

"Perhaps; but I have always been blamed for thinking of prospects, and
not settling to anything.  And here is something offered to me.  If you
would not like me to accept it, I will give it up.  Otherwise I would
rather stay in this part of the country than go away.  I belong to
nobody anywhere else."

"I should like you to stay very much," said Dorothea, at once, as
simply and readily as she had spoken at Rome.  There was not the shadow
of a reason in her mind at the moment why she should not say so.

"Then I _will_ stay," said Ladislaw, shaking his head backward, rising
and going towards the window, as if to see whether the rain had ceased.

But the next moment, Dorothea, according to a habit which was getting
continually stronger, began to reflect that her husband felt
differently from herself, and she colored deeply under the double
embarrassment of having expressed what might be in opposition to her
husband's feeling, and of having to suggest this opposition to Will.
His face was not turned towards her, and this made it easier to say--

"But my opinion is of little consequence on such a subject.  I think
you should be guided by Mr. Casaubon.  I spoke without thinking of
anything else than my own feeling, which has nothing to do with the
real question.  But it now occurs to me--perhaps Mr. Casaubon might
see that the proposal was not wise.  Can you not wait now and mention
it to him?"

"I can't wait to-day," said Will, inwardly seared by the possibility
that Mr. Casaubon would enter.  "The rain is quite over now.  I told
Mr. Brooke not to call for me: I would rather walk the five miles.  I
shall strike across Halsell Common, and see the gleams on the wet
grass.  I like that."

He approached her to shake hands quite hurriedly, longing but not
daring to say, "Don't mention the subject to Mr. Casaubon." No, he
dared not, could not say it.  To ask her to be less simple and direct
would be like breathing on the crystal that you want to see the light
through.  And there was always the other great dread--of himself
becoming dimmed and forever ray-shorn in her eyes.

"I wish you could have stayed," said Dorothea, with a touch of
mournfulness, as she rose and put out her hand.  She also had her
thought which she did not like to express:--Will certainly ought to
lose no time in consulting Mr. Casaubon's wishes, but for her to urge
this might seem an undue dictation.

So they only said "Good-by," and Will quitted the house, striking
across the fields so as not to run any risk of encountering Mr.
Casaubon's carriage, which, however, did not appear at the gate until
four o'clock. That was an unpropitious hour for coming home: it was too
early to gain the moral support under ennui of dressing his person for
dinner, and too late to undress his mind of the day's frivolous
ceremony and affairs, so as to be prepared for a good plunge into the
serious business of study.  On such occasions he usually threw into an
easy-chair in the library, and allowed Dorothea to read the London
papers to him, closing his eyes the while.  To-day, however, he
declined that relief, observing that he had already had too many public
details urged upon him; but he spoke more cheerfully than usual, when
Dorothea asked about his fatigue, and added with that air of formal
effort which never forsook him even when he spoke without his waistcoat
and cravat--

"I have had the gratification of meeting my former acquaintance, Dr.
Spanning, to-day, and of being praised by one who is himself a worthy
recipient of praise.  He spoke very handsomely of my late tractate on
the Egyptian Mysteries,--using, in fact, terms which it would not
become me to repeat."  In uttering the last clause, Mr. Casaubon leaned
over the elbow of his chair, and swayed his head up and down,
apparently as a muscular outlet instead of that recapitulation which
would not have been becoming.

"I am very glad you have had that pleasure," said Dorothea, delighted
to see her husband less weary than usual at this hour.  "Before you
came I had been regretting that you happened to be out to-day."

"Why so, my dear?" said Mr. Casaubon, throwing himself backward again.

"Because Mr. Ladislaw has been here; and he has mentioned a proposal of
my uncle's which I should like to know your opinion of." Her husband
she felt was really concerned in this question.  Even with her
ignorance of the world she had a vague impression that the position
offered to Will was out of keeping with his family connections, and
certainly Mr. Casaubon had a claim to be consulted.  He did not speak,
but merely bowed.

"Dear uncle, you know, has many projects.  It appears that he has
bought one of the Middlemarch newspapers, and he has asked Mr. Ladislaw
to stay in this neighborhood and conduct the paper for him, besides
helping him in other ways."

Dorothea looked at her husband while she spoke, but he had at first
blinked and finally closed his eyes, as if to save them; while his lips
became more tense.  "What is your opinion?" she added, rather timidly,
after a slight pause.

"Did Mr. Ladislaw come on purpose to ask my opinion?" said Mr.
Casaubon, opening his eyes narrowly with a knife-edged look at
Dorothea.  She was really uncomfortable on the point he inquired about,
but she only became a little more serious, and her eyes did not swerve.

"No," she answered immediately, "he did not say that he came to ask
your opinion.  But when he mentioned the proposal, he of course
expected me to tell you of it."

Mr. Casaubon was silent.

"I feared that you might feel some objection.  But certainly a young
man with so much talent might be very useful to my uncle--might help
him to do good in a better way.  And Mr. Ladislaw wishes to have some
fixed occupation.  He has been blamed, he says, for not seeking
something of that kind, and he would like to stay in this neighborhood
because no one cares for him elsewhere."

Dorothea felt that this was a consideration to soften her husband.
However, he did not speak, and she presently recurred to Dr. Spanning
and the Archdeacon's breakfast.  But there was no longer sunshine on
these subjects.

The next morning, without Dorothea's knowledge, Mr. Casaubon despatched
the following letter, beginning "Dear Mr. Ladislaw" (he had always
before addressed him as "Will"):--


"Mrs. Casaubon informs me that a proposal has been made to you, and
(according to an inference by no means stretched) has on your part been
in some degree entertained, which involves your residence in this
neighborhood in a capacity which I am justified in saying touches my
own position in such a way as renders it not only natural and
warrantable in me when that effect is viewed under the influence of
legitimate feeling, but incumbent on me when the same effect is
considered in the light of my responsibilities, to state at once that
your acceptance of the proposal above indicated would be highly
offensive to me.  That I have some claim to the exercise of a veto
here, would not, I believe, be denied by any reasonable person
cognizant of the relations between us: relations which, though thrown
into the past by your recent procedure, are not thereby annulled in
their character of determining antecedents.  I will not here make
reflections on any person's judgment.  It is enough for me to point out
to yourself that there are certain social fitnesses and proprieties
which should hinder a somewhat near relative of mine from becoming any
wise conspicuous in this vicinity in a status not only much beneath my
own, but associated at best with the sciolism of literary or political
adventurers.  At any rate, the contrary issue must exclude you from
further reception at my house.

                Yours faithfully,
                        "EDWARD CASAUBON."


Meanwhile Dorothea's mind was innocently at work towards the further
embitterment of her husband; dwelling, with a sympathy that grew to
agitation, on what Will had told her about his parents and
grandparents.  Any private hours in her day were usually spent in her
blue-green boudoir, and she had come to be very fond of its pallid
quaintness.  Nothing had been outwardly altered there; but while the
summer had gradually advanced over the western fields beyond the avenue
of elms, the bare room had gathered within it those memories of an
inward life which fill the air as with a cloud of good or bad angels,
the invisible yet active forms of our spiritual triumphs or our
spiritual falls.  She had been so used to struggle for and to find
resolve in looking along the avenue towards the arch of western light
that the vision itself had gained a communicating power.  Even the pale
stag seemed to have reminding glances and to mean mutely, "Yes, we
know." And the group of delicately touched miniatures had made an
audience as of beings no longer disturbed about their own earthly lot,
but still humanly interested.  Especially the mysterious "Aunt Julia"
about whom Dorothea had never found it easy to question her husband.

And now, since her conversation with Will, many fresh images had
gathered round that Aunt Julia who was Will's grandmother; the presence
of that delicate miniature, so like a living face that she knew,
helping to concentrate her feelings.  What a wrong, to cut off the girl
from the family protection and inheritance only because she had chosen
a man who was poor!  Dorothea, early troubling her elders with
questions about the facts around her, had wrought herself into some
independent clearness as to the historical, political reasons why
eldest sons had superior rights, and why land should be entailed: those
reasons, impressing her with a certain awe, might be weightier than she
knew, but here was a question of ties which left them uninfringed.
Here was a daughter whose child--even according to the ordinary aping
of aristocratic institutions by people who are no more aristocratic
than retired grocers, and who have no more land to "keep together" than
a lawn and a paddock--would have a prior claim.  Was inheritance a
question of liking or of responsibility?  All the energy of Dorothea's
nature went on the side of responsibility--the fulfilment of claims
founded on our own deeds, such as marriage and parentage.

It was true, she said to herself, that Mr. Casaubon had a debt to the
Ladislaws--that he had to pay back what the Ladislaws had been wronged
of.  And now she began to think of her husband's will, which had been
made at the time of their marriage, leaving the bulk of his property to
her, with proviso in case of her having children.  That ought to be
altered; and no time ought to be lost.  This very question which had
just arisen about Will Ladislaw's occupation, was the occasion for
placing things on a new, right footing.  Her husband, she felt sure,
according to all his previous conduct, would be ready to take the just
view, if she proposed it--she, in whose interest an unfair
concentration of the property had been urged.  His sense of right had
surmounted and would continue to surmount anything that might be called
antipathy.  She suspected that her uncle's scheme was disapproved by
Mr. Casaubon, and this made it seem all the more opportune that a fresh
understanding should be begun, so that instead of Will's starting
penniless and accepting the first function that offered itself, he
should find himself in possession of a rightful income which should be
paid by her husband during his life, and, by an immediate alteration of
the will, should be secured at his death.  The vision of all this as
what ought to be done seemed to Dorothea like a sudden letting in of
daylight, waking her from her previous stupidity and incurious
self-absorbed ignorance about her husband's relation to others.  Will
Ladislaw had refused Mr. Casaubon's future aid on a ground that no
longer appeared right to her; and Mr. Casaubon had never himself seen
fully what was the claim upon him.  "But he will!" said Dorothea.  "The
great strength of his character lies here.  And what are we doing with
our money?  We make no use of half of our income.  My own money buys me
nothing but an uneasy conscience."

There was a peculiar fascination for Dorothea in this division of
property intended for herself, and always regarded by her as excessive.
She was blind, you see, to many things obvious to others--likely to
tread in the wrong places, as Celia had warned her; yet her blindness
to whatever did not lie in her own pure purpose carried her safely by
the side of precipices where vision would have been perilous with fear.

The thoughts which had gathered vividness in the solitude of her
boudoir occupied her incessantly through the day on which Mr. Casaubon
had sent his letter to Will.  Everything seemed hindrance to her till
she could find an opportunity of opening her heart to her husband.  To
his preoccupied mind all subjects were to be approached gently, and she
had never since his illness lost from her consciousness the dread of
agitating him.  But when young ardor is set brooding over the
conception of a prompt deed, the deed itself seems to start forth with
independent life, mastering ideal obstacles.  The day passed in a
sombre fashion, not unusual, though Mr. Casaubon was perhaps unusually
silent; but there were hours of the night which might be counted on as
opportunities of conversation; for Dorothea, when aware of her
husband's sleeplessness, had established a habit of rising, lighting a
candle, and reading him to sleep again.  And this night she was from
the beginning sleepless, excited by resolves.  He slept as usual for a
few hours, but she had risen softly and had sat in the darkness for
nearly an hour before he said--

"Dorothea, since you are up, will you light a candle?"

"Do you feel ill, dear?" was her first question, as she obeyed him.

"No, not at all; but I shall be obliged, since you are up, if you will
read me a few pages of Lowth."

"May I talk to you a little instead?" said Dorothea.

"Certainly."

"I have been thinking about money all day--that I have always had too
much, and especially the prospect of too much."

"These, my dear Dorothea, are providential arrangements."

"But if one has too much in consequence of others being wronged, it
seems to me that the divine voice which tells us to set that wrong
right must be obeyed."

"What, my love, is the bearing of your remark?"

"That you have been too liberal in arrangements for me--I mean, with
regard to property; and that makes me unhappy."

"How so?  I have none but comparatively distant connections."

"I have been led to think about your aunt Julia, and how she was left
in poverty only because she married a poor man, an act which was not
disgraceful, since he was not unworthy.  It was on that ground, I know,
that you educated Mr. Ladislaw and provided for his mother."

Dorothea waited a few moments for some answer that would help her
onward.  None came, and her next words seemed the more forcible to her,
falling clear upon the dark silence.

"But surely we should regard his claim as a much greater one, even to
the half of that property which I know that you have destined for me.
And I think he ought at once to be provided for on that understanding.
It is not right that he should be in the dependence of poverty while we
are rich.  And if there is any objection to the proposal he mentioned,
the giving him his true place and his true share would set aside any
motive for his accepting it."

"Mr. Ladislaw has probably been speaking to you on this subject?" said
Mr. Casaubon, with a certain biting quickness not habitual to him.

"Indeed, no!" said Dorothea, earnestly.  "How can you imagine it, since
he has so lately declined everything from you?  I fear you think too
hardly of him, dear.  He only told me a little about his parents and
grandparents, and almost all in answer to my questions.  You are so
good, so just--you have done everything you thought to be right.  But
it seems to me clear that more than that is right; and I must speak
about it, since I am the person who would get what is called benefit by
that 'more' not being done."

There was a perceptible pause before Mr. Casaubon replied, not quickly
as before, but with a still more biting emphasis.

"Dorothea, my love, this is not the first occasion, but it were well
that it should be the last, on which you have assumed a judgment on
subjects beyond your scope.  Into the question how far conduct,
especially in the matter of alliances, constitutes a forfeiture of
family claims, I do not now enter.  Suffice it, that you are not here
qualified to discriminate.  What I now wish you to understand is, that
I accept no revision, still less dictation within that range of affairs
which I have deliberated upon as distinctly and properly mine.  It is
not for you to interfere between me and Mr. Ladislaw, and still less to
encourage communications from him to you which constitute a criticism
on my procedure."

Poor Dorothea, shrouded in the darkness, was in a tumult of conflicting
emotions.  Alarm at the possible effect on himself of her husband's
strongly manifested anger, would have checked any expression of her own
resentment, even if she had been quite free from doubt and compunction
under the consciousness that there might be some justice in his last
insinuation.  Hearing him breathe quickly after he had spoken, she sat
listening, frightened, wretched--with a dumb inward cry for help to
bear this nightmare of a life in which every energy was arrested by
dread.  But nothing else happened, except that they both remained a
long while sleepless, without speaking again.

The next day, Mr. Casaubon received the following answer from Will
Ladislaw:--


"DEAR MR. CASAUBON,--I have given all due consideration to your letter
of yesterday, but I am unable to take precisely your view of our mutual
position.  With the fullest acknowledgment of your generous conduct to
me in the past, I must still maintain that an obligation of this kind
cannot fairly fetter me as you appear to expect that it should.
Granted that a benefactor's wishes may constitute a claim; there must
always be a reservation as to the quality of those wishes.  They may
possibly clash with more imperative considerations.  Or a benefactor's
veto might impose such a negation on a man's life that the consequent
blank might be more cruel than the benefaction was generous.  I am
merely using strong illustrations.  In the present case I am unable to
take your view of the bearing which my acceptance of occupation--not
enriching certainly, but not dishonorable--will have on your own
position which seems to me too substantial to be affected in that
shadowy manner.  And though I do not believe that any change in our
relations will occur (certainly none has yet occurred) which can
nullify the obligations imposed on me by the past, pardon me for not
seeing that those obligations should restrain me from using the
ordinary freedom of living where I choose, and maintaining myself by
any lawful occupation I may choose.  Regretting that there exists this
difference between us as to a relation in which the conferring of
benefits has been entirely on your side--

                I remain, yours with persistent obligation,
                        WILL LADISLAW."


Poor Mr. Casaubon felt (and must not we, being impartial, feel with him
a little?) that no man had juster cause for disgust and suspicion than
he.  Young Ladislaw, he was sure, meant to defy and annoy him, meant to
win Dorothea's confidence and sow her mind with disrespect, and perhaps
aversion, towards her husband.  Some motive beneath the surface had
been needed to account for Will's sudden change of course in rejecting Mr.
Casaubon's aid and quitting his travels; and this defiant determination
to fix himself in the neighborhood by taking up something so much at
variance with his former choice as Mr. Brooke's Middlemarch projects,
revealed clearly enough that the undeclared motive had relation to
Dorothea.  Not for one moment did Mr. Casaubon suspect Dorothea of any
doubleness: he had no suspicions of her, but he had (what was little
less uncomfortable) the positive knowledge that her tendency to form
opinions about her husband's conduct was accompanied with a disposition
to regard Will Ladislaw favorably and be influenced by what he said.
His own proud reticence had prevented him from ever being undeceived in
the supposition that Dorothea had originally asked her uncle to invite
Will to his house.

And now, on receiving Will's letter, Mr. Casaubon had to consider his
duty.  He would never have been easy to call his action anything else
than duty; but in this case, contending motives thrust him back into
negations.

Should he apply directly to Mr. Brooke, and demand of that troublesome
gentleman to revoke his proposal?  Or should he consult Sir James
Chettam, and get him to concur in remonstrance against a step which
touched the whole family?  In either case Mr. Casaubon was aware that
failure was just as probable as success.  It was impossible for him to
mention Dorothea's name in the matter, and without some alarming
urgency Mr. Brooke was as likely as not, after meeting all
representations with apparent assent, to wind up by saying, "Never
fear, Casaubon!  Depend upon it, young Ladislaw will do you credit.
Depend upon it, I have put my finger on the right thing."  And Mr.
Casaubon shrank nervously from communicating on the subject with Sir
James Chettam, between whom and himself there had never been any
cordiality, and who would immediately think of Dorothea without any
mention of her.

Poor Mr. Casaubon was distrustful of everybody's feeling towards him,
especially as a husband.  To let any one suppose that he was jealous
would be to admit their (suspected) view of his disadvantages: to let
them know that he did not find marriage particularly blissful would
imply his conversion to their (probably) earlier disapproval.  It would
be as bad as letting Carp, and Brasenose generally, know how backward
he was in organizing the matter for his "Key to all Mythologies."  All
through his life Mr. Casaubon had been trying not to admit even to
himself the inward sores of self-doubt and jealousy.  And on the most
delicate of all personal subjects, the habit of proud suspicious
reticence told doubly.

Thus Mr. Casaubon remained proudly, bitterly silent.  But he had
forbidden Will to come to Lowick Manor, and he was mentally preparing
other measures of frustration.



CHAPTER XXXVIII.

    "C'est beaucoup que le jugement des hommes sur les actions
    humaines; tot ou tard il devient efficace."--GUIZOT.


Sir James Chettam could not look with any satisfaction on Mr. Brooke's
new courses; but it was easier to object than to hinder.  Sir James
accounted for his having come in alone one day to lunch with the
Cadwalladers by saying--

"I can't talk to you as I want, before Celia: it might hurt her.
Indeed, it would not be right."

"I know what you mean--the 'Pioneer' at the Grange!" darted in Mrs.
Cadwallader, almost before the last word was off her friend's tongue.
"It is frightful--this taking to buying whistles and blowing them in
everybody's hearing.  Lying in bed all day and playing at dominoes,
like poor Lord Plessy, would be more private and bearable."

"I see they are beginning to attack our friend Brooke in the
'Trumpet,'" said the Rector, lounging back and smiling easily, as he
would have done if he had been attacked himself.  "There are tremendous
sarcasms against a landlord not a hundred miles from Middlemarch, who
receives his own rents, and makes no returns."

"I do wish Brooke would leave that off," said Sir James, with his
little frown of annoyance.

"Is he really going to be put in nomination, though?" said Mr.
Cadwallader.  "I saw Farebrother yesterday--he's Whiggish himself,
hoists Brougham and Useful Knowledge; that's the worst I know of
him;--and he says that Brooke is getting up a pretty strong party.
Bulstrode, the banker, is his foremost man.  But he thinks Brooke would
come off badly at a nomination."

"Exactly," said Sir James, with earnestness.  "I have been inquiring
into the thing, for I've never known anything about Middlemarch
politics before--the county being my business.  What Brooke trusts to,
is that they are going to turn out Oliver because he is a Peelite.  But
Hawley tells me that if they send up a Whig at all it is sure to be
Bagster, one of those candidates who come from heaven knows where, but
dead against Ministers, and an experienced Parliamentary man.  Hawley's
rather rough: he forgot that he was speaking to me.  He said if Brooke
wanted a pelting, he could get it cheaper than by going to the
hustings."

"I warned you all of it," said Mrs. Cadwallader, waving her hands
outward.  "I said to Humphrey long ago, Mr. Brooke is going to make a
splash in the mud.  And now he has done it."

"Well, he might have taken it into his head to marry," said the Rector.
"That would have been a graver mess than a little flirtation with
politics."

"He may do that afterwards," said Mrs. Cadwallader--"when he has come
out on the other side of the mud with an ague."

"What I care for most is his own dignity," said Sir James.  "Of course
I care the more because of the family.  But he's getting on in life
now, and I don't like to think of his exposing himself.  They will be
raking up everything against him."

"I suppose it's no use trying any persuasion," said the Rector.
"There's such an odd mixture of obstinacy and changeableness in Brooke.
Have you tried him on the subject?"

"Well, no," said Sir James; "I feel a delicacy in appearing to dictate.
But I have been talking to this young Ladislaw that Brooke is making a
factotum of.  Ladislaw seems clever enough for anything.  I thought it
as well to hear what he had to say; and he is against Brooke's standing
this time.  I think he'll turn him round: I think the nomination may be
staved off."

"I know," said Mrs. Cadwallader, nodding.  "The independent member
hasn't got his speeches well enough by heart."

"But this Ladislaw--there again is a vexatious business," said Sir
James.  "We have had him two or three times to dine at the Hall (you
have met him, by the bye) as Brooke's guest and a relation of
Casaubon's, thinking he was only on a flying visit.  And now I find
he's in everybody's mouth in Middlemarch as the editor of the
'Pioneer.'  There are stories going about him as a quill-driving alien,
a foreign emissary, and what not."

"Casaubon won't like that," said the Rector.

"There _is_ some foreign blood in Ladislaw," returned Sir James.  "I
hope he won't go into extreme opinions and carry Brooke on."

"Oh, he's a dangerous young sprig, that Mr. Ladislaw," said Mrs.
Cadwallader, "with his opera songs and his ready tongue.  A sort of
Byronic hero--an amorous conspirator, it strikes me.  And Thomas
Aquinas is not fond of him.  I could see that, the day the picture was
brought."

"I don't like to begin on the subject with Casaubon," said Sir James.
"He has more right to interfere than I. But it's a disagreeable affair
all round.  What a character for anybody with decent connections to
show himself in!--one of those newspaper fellows!  You have only to
look at Keck, who manages the 'Trumpet.' I saw him the other day with
Hawley.  His writing is sound enough, I believe, but he's such a low
fellow, that I wished he had been on the wrong side."

"What can you expect with these peddling Middlemarch papers?" said the
Rector.  "I don't suppose you could get a high style of man anywhere to
be writing up interests he doesn't really care about, and for pay that
hardly keeps him in at elbows."

"Exactly: that makes it so annoying that Brooke should have put a man
who has a sort of connection with the family in a position of that
kind.  For my part, I think Ladislaw is rather a fool for accepting."

"It is Aquinas's fault," said Mrs. Cadwallader.  "Why didn't he use his
interest to get Ladislaw made an attache or sent to India?  That is how
families get rid of troublesome sprigs."

"There is no knowing to what lengths the mischief may go," said Sir
James, anxiously.  "But if Casaubon says nothing, what can I do?"

"Oh my dear Sir James," said the Rector, "don't let us make too much of
all this.  It is likely enough to end in mere smoke.  After a month or
two Brooke and this Master Ladislaw will get tired of each other;
Ladislaw will take wing; Brooke will sell the 'Pioneer,' and everything
will settle down again as usual."

"There is one good chance--that he will not like to feel his money
oozing away," said Mrs. Cadwallader.  "If I knew the items of election
expenses I could scare him.  It's no use plying him with wide words
like Expenditure: I wouldn't talk of phlebotomy, I would empty a pot of
leeches upon him.  What we good stingy people don't like, is having our
sixpences sucked away from us."

"And he will not like having things raked up against him," said Sir
James.  "There is the management of his estate.  They have begun upon
that already.  And it really is painful for me to see.  It is a
nuisance under one's very nose.  I do think one is bound to do the best
for one's land and tenants, especially in these hard times."

"Perhaps the 'Trumpet' may rouse him to make a change, and some good
may come of it all," said the Rector.  "I know I should be glad.  I
should hear less grumbling when my tithe is paid.  I don't know what I
should do if there were not a modus in Tipton."

"I want him to have a proper man to look after things--I want him to
take on Garth again," said Sir James.  "He got rid of Garth twelve
years ago, and everything has been going wrong since.  I think of
getting Garth to manage for me--he has made such a capital plan for my
buildings; and Lovegood is hardly up to the mark.  But Garth would not
undertake the Tipton estate again unless Brooke left it entirely to
him."

"In the right of it too," said the Rector.  "Garth is an independent
fellow: an original, simple-minded fellow.  One day, when he was doing
some valuation for me, he told me point-blank that clergymen seldom
understood anything about business, and did mischief when they meddled;
but he said it as quietly and respectfully as if he had been talking to
me about sailors.  He would make a different parish of Tipton, if
Brooke would let him manage.  I wish, by the help of the 'Trumpet,' you
could bring that round."

"If Dorothea had kept near her uncle, there would have been some
chance," said Sir James.  "She might have got some power over him in
time, and she was always uneasy about the estate.  She had wonderfully
good notions about such things.  But now Casaubon takes her up
entirely.  Celia complains a good deal.  We can hardly get her to dine
with us, since he had that fit." Sir James ended with a look of pitying
disgust, and Mrs. Cadwallader shrugged her shoulders as much as to say
that _she_ was not likely to see anything new in that direction.

"Poor Casaubon!" the Rector said.  "That was a nasty attack.  I thought
he looked shattered the other day at the Archdeacon's."

"In point of fact," resumed Sir James, not choosing to dwell on "fits,"
"Brooke doesn't mean badly by his tenants or any one else, but he has
got that way of paring and clipping at expenses."

"Come, that's a blessing," said Mrs. Cadwallader.  "That helps him to
find himself in a morning.  He may not know his own opinions, but he
does know his own pocket."

"I don't believe a man is in pocket by stinginess on his land," said
Sir James.

"Oh, stinginess may be abused like other virtues: it will not do to
keep one's own pigs lean," said Mrs. Cadwallader, who had risen to look
out of the window.  "But talk of an independent politician and he will
appear."

"What!  Brooke?" said her husband.

"Yes.  Now, you ply him with the 'Trumpet,' Humphrey; and I will put
the leeches on him.  What will you do, Sir James?"

"The fact is, I don't like to begin about it with Brooke, in our mutual
position; the whole thing is so unpleasant.  I do wish people would
behave like gentlemen," said the good baronet, feeling that this was a
simple and comprehensive programme for social well-being.

"Here you all are, eh?" said Mr. Brooke, shuffling round and shaking
hands.  "I was going up to the Hall by-and-by, Chettam.  But it's
pleasant to find everybody, you know.  Well, what do you think of
things?--going on a little fast!  It was true enough, what Lafitte
said--'Since yesterday, a century has passed away:'--they're in the
next century, you know, on the other side of the water.  Going on
faster than we are."

"Why, yes," said the Rector, taking up the newspaper.  "Here is the
'Trumpet' accusing you of lagging behind--did you see?"

"Eh? no," said Mr. Brooke, dropping his gloves into his hat and hastily
adjusting his eye-glass. But Mr. Cadwallader kept the paper in his
hand, saying, with a smile in his eyes--

"Look here! all this is about a landlord not a hundred miles from
Middlemarch, who receives his own rents.  They say he is the most
retrogressive man in the county.  I think you must have taught them
that word in the 'Pioneer.'"

"Oh, that is Keck--an illiterate fellow, you know.  Retrogressive, now!
Come, that's capital.  He thinks it means destructive: they want to
make me out a destructive, you know," said Mr. Brooke, with that
cheerfulness which is usually sustained by an adversary's ignorance.

"I think he knows the meaning of the word.  Here is a sharp stroke or
two.  If we had to describe a man who is retrogressive in the most evil
sense of the word--we should say, he is one who would dub himself a
reformer of our constitution, while every interest for which he is
immediately responsible is going to decay: a philanthropist who cannot
bear one rogue to be hanged, but does not mind five honest tenants
being half-starved: a man who shrieks at corruption, and keeps his
farms at rack-rent: who roars himself red at rotten boroughs, and does
not mind if every field on his farms has a rotten gate: a man very
open-hearted to Leeds and Manchester, no doubt; he would give any
number of representatives who will pay for their seats out of their own
pockets: what he objects to giving, is a little return on rent-days to
help a tenant to buy stock, or an outlay on repairs to keep the weather
out at a tenant's barn-door or make his house look a little less like
an Irish cottier's. But we all know the wag's definition of a
philanthropist: a man whose charity increases directly as the square of
the distance. And so on.  All the rest is to show what sort of
legislator a philanthropist is likely to make," ended the Rector,
throwing down the paper, and clasping his hands at the back of his
head, while he looked at Mr. Brooke with an air of amused neutrality.

"Come, that's rather good, you know," said Mr. Brooke, taking up the
paper and trying to bear the attack as easily as his neighbor did, but
coloring and smiling rather nervously; "that about roaring himself red
at rotten boroughs--I never made a speech about rotten boroughs in my
life.  And as to roaring myself red and that kind of thing--these men
never understand what is good satire.  Satire, you know, should be true
up to a certain point.  I recollect they said that in 'The Edinburgh'
somewhere--it must be true up to a certain point."

"Well, that is really a hit about the gates," said Sir James, anxious
to tread carefully.  "Dagley complained to me the other day that he
hadn't got a decent gate on his farm.  Garth has invented a new pattern
of gate--I wish you would try it.  One ought to use some of one's
timber in that way."

"You go in for fancy farming, you know, Chettam," said Mr. Brooke,
appearing to glance over the columns of the "Trumpet."  "That's your
hobby, and you don't mind the expense."

"I thought the most expensive hobby in the world was standing for
Parliament," said Mrs. Cadwallader.  "They said the last unsuccessful
candidate at Middlemarch--Giles, wasn't his name?--spent ten thousand
pounds and failed because he did not bribe enough.  What a bitter
reflection for a man!"

"Somebody was saying," said the Rector, laughingly, "that East Retford
was nothing to Middlemarch, for bribery."

"Nothing of the kind," said Mr. Brooke.  "The Tories bribe, you know:
Hawley and his set bribe with treating, hot codlings, and that sort of
thing; and they bring the voters drunk to the poll.  But they are not
going to have it their own way in future--not in future, you know.
Middlemarch is a little backward, I admit--the freemen are a little
backward.  But we shall educate them--we shall bring them on, you
know.  The best people there are on our side."

"Hawley says you have men on your side who will do you harm," remarked
Sir James.  "He says Bulstrode the banker will do you harm."

"And that if you got pelted," interposed Mrs. Cadwallader, "half the
rotten eggs would mean hatred of your committee-man. Good heavens!
Think what it must be to be pelted for wrong opinions.  And I seem to
remember a story of a man they pretended to chair and let him fall into
a dust-heap on purpose!"

"Pelting is nothing to their finding holes in one's coat," said the
Rector.  "I confess that's what I should be afraid of, if we parsons
had to stand at the hustings for preferment.  I should be afraid of
their reckoning up all my fishing days.  Upon my word, I think the
truth is the hardest missile one can be pelted with."

"The fact is," said Sir James, "if a man goes into public life he must
be prepared for the consequences.  He must make himself proof against
calumny."

"My dear Chettam, that is all very fine, you know," said Mr. Brooke.
"But how will you make yourself proof against calumny?  You should read
history--look at ostracism, persecution, martyrdom, and that kind of
thing.  They always happen to the best men, you know.  But what is that
in Horace?--'fiat justitia, ruat . . .  something or other."

"Exactly," said Sir James, with a little more heat than usual.  "What I
mean by being proof against calumny is being able to point to the fact
as a contradiction."

"And it is not martyrdom to pay bills that one has run into one's
self," said Mrs. Cadwallader.

But it was Sir James's evident annoyance that most stirred Mr. Brooke.
"Well, you know, Chettam," he said, rising, taking up his hat and
leaning on his stick, "you and I have a different system.  You are all
for outlay with your farms.  I don't want to make out that my system is
good under all circumstances--under all circumstances, you know."

"There ought to be a new valuation made from time to time," said Sir
James.  "Returns are very well occasionally, but I like a fair
valuation.  What do you say, Cadwallader?"

"I agree with you.  If I were Brooke, I would choke the 'Trumpet' at
once by getting Garth to make a new valuation of the farms, and giving
him carte blanche about gates and repairs: that's my view of the
political situation," said the Rector, broadening himself by sticking
his thumbs in his armholes, and laughing towards Mr. Brooke.

"That's a showy sort of thing to do, you know," said Mr. Brooke.  "But
I should like you to tell me of another landlord who has distressed his
tenants for arrears as little as I have.  I let the old tenants stay
on.  I'm uncommonly easy, let me tell you, uncommonly easy.  I have my
own ideas, and I take my stand on them, you know.  A man who does that
is always charged with eccentricity, inconsistency, and that kind of
thing.  When I change my line of action, I shall follow my own ideas."

After that, Mr. Brooke remembered that there was a packet which he had
omitted to send off from the Grange, and he bade everybody hurriedly
good-by.

"I didn't want to take a liberty with Brooke," said Sir James; "I see
he is nettled.  But as to what he says about old tenants, in point of
fact no new tenant would take the farms on the present terms."

"I have a notion that he will be brought round in time," said the
Rector.  "But you were pulling one way, Elinor, and we were pulling
another.  You wanted to frighten him away from expense, and we want to
frighten him into it.  Better let him try to be popular and see that
his character as a landlord stands in his way.  I don't think it
signifies two straws about the 'Pioneer,' or Ladislaw, or Brooke's
speechifying to the Middlemarchers.  But it does signify about the
parishioners in Tipton being comfortable."

"Excuse me, it is you two who are on the wrong tack," said Mrs.
Cadwallader.  "You should have proved to him that he loses money by bad
management, and then we should all have pulled together.  If you put
him a-horseback on politics, I warn you of the consequences.  It was
all very well to ride on sticks at home and call them ideas."



CHAPTER XXXIX.

    "If, as I have, you also doe,
       Vertue attired in woman see,
     And dare love that, and say so too,
       And forget the He and She;

     And if this love, though placed so,
       From prophane men you hide,
     Which will no faith on this bestow,
       Or, if they doe, deride:

     Then you have done a braver thing
       Than all the Worthies did,
     And a braver thence will spring,
       Which is, to keep that hid."
                             --DR. DONNE.


Sir James Chettam's mind was not fruitful in devices, but his growing
anxiety to "act on Brooke," once brought close to his constant belief
in Dorothea's capacity for influence, became formative, and issued in a
little plan; namely, to plead Celia's indisposition as a reason for
fetching Dorothea by herself to the Hall, and to leave her at the
Grange with the carriage on the way, after making her fully aware of
the situation concerning the management of the estate.

In this way it happened that one day near four o'clock, when Mr. Brooke
and Ladislaw were seated in the library, the door opened and Mrs.
Casaubon was announced.

Will, the moment before, had been low in the depths of boredom, and,
obliged to help Mr. Brooke in arranging "documents" about hanging
sheep-stealers, was exemplifying the power our minds have of riding
several horses at once by inwardly arranging measures towards getting a
lodging for himself in Middlemarch and cutting short his constant
residence at the Grange; while there flitted through all these steadier
images a tickling vision of a sheep-stealing epic written with Homeric
particularity.  When Mrs. Casaubon was announced he started up as from
an electric shock, and felt a tingling at his finger-ends.  Any one
observing him would have seen a change in his complexion, in the
adjustment of his facial muscles, in the vividness of his glance, which
might have made them imagine that every molecule in his body had passed
the message of a magic touch.  And so it had.  For effective magic is
transcendent nature; and who shall measure the subtlety of those
touches which convey the quality of soul as well as body, and make a
man's passion for one woman differ from his passion for another as joy
in the morning light over valley and river and white mountain-top
differs from joy among Chinese lanterns and glass panels?  Will, too,
was made of very impressible stuff.  The bow of a violin drawn near him
cleverly, would at one stroke change the aspect of the world for him,
and his point of view shifted--as easily as his mood.  Dorothea's
entrance was the freshness of morning.

"Well, my dear, this is pleasant, now," said Mr. Brooke, meeting and
kissing her.  "You have left Casaubon with his books, I suppose.
That's right.  We must not have you getting too learned for a woman,
you know."

"There is no fear of that, uncle," said Dorothea, turning to Will and
shaking hands with open cheerfulness, while she made no other form of
greeting, but went on answering her uncle.  "I am very slow.  When I
want to be busy with books, I am often playing truant among my
thoughts.  I find it is not so easy to be learned as to plan cottages."

She seated herself beside her uncle opposite to Will, and was evidently
preoccupied with something that made her almost unmindful of him.  He
was ridiculously disappointed, as if he had imagined that her coming
had anything to do with him.

"Why, yes, my dear, it was quite your hobby to draw plans.  But it was
good to break that off a little.  Hobbies are apt to ran away with us,
you know; it doesn't do to be run away with.  We must keep the reins.
I have never let myself be run away with; I always pulled up.  That is
what I tell Ladislaw.  He and I are alike, you know: he likes to go
into everything.  We are working at capital punishment.  We shall do a
great deal together, Ladislaw and I."

"Yes," said Dorothea, with characteristic directness, "Sir James has
been telling me that he is in hope of seeing a great change made soon
in your management of the estate--that you are thinking of having the
farms valued, and repairs made, and the cottages improved, so that
Tipton may look quite another place.  Oh, how happy!"--she went on,
clasping her hands, with a return to that more childlike impetuous
manner, which had been subdued since her marriage.  "If I were at home
still, I should take to riding again, that I might go about with you
and see all that!  And you are going to engage Mr. Garth, who praised
my cottages, Sir James says."

"Chettam is a little hasty, my dear," said Mr. Brooke, coloring
slightly; "a little hasty, you know.  I never said I should do anything
of the kind.  I never said I should _not_ do it, you know."

"He only feels confident that you will do it," said Dorothea, in a
voice as clear and unhesitating as that of a young chorister chanting a
credo, "because you mean to enter Parliament as a member who cares for
the improvement of the people, and one of the first things to be made
better is the state of the land and the laborers.  Think of Kit Downes,
uncle, who lives with his wife and seven children in a house with one
sitting room and one bedroom hardly larger than this table!--and those
poor Dagleys, in their tumble-down farmhouse, where they live in the
back kitchen and leave the other rooms to the rats!  That is one reason
why I did not like the pictures here, dear uncle--which you think me
stupid about.  I used to come from the village with all that dirt and
coarse ugliness like a pain within me, and the simpering pictures in
the drawing-room seemed to me like a wicked attempt to find delight in
what is false, while we don't mind how hard the truth is for the
neighbors outside our walls.  I think we have no right to come forward
and urge wider changes for good, until we have tried to alter the evils
which lie under our own hands."

Dorothea had gathered emotion as she went on, and had forgotten
everything except the relief of pouring forth her feelings, unchecked:
an experience once habitual with her, but hardly ever present since her
marriage, which had been a perpetual struggle of energy with fear.  For
the moment, Will's admiration was accompanied with a chilling sense of
remoteness.  A man is seldom ashamed of feeling that he cannot love a
woman so well when he sees a certain greatness in her: nature having
intended greatness for men.  But nature has sometimes made sad
oversights in carrying out her intention; as in the case of good Mr.
Brooke, whose masculine consciousness was at this moment in rather a
stammering condition under the eloquence of his niece.  He could not
immediately find any other mode of expressing himself than that of
rising, fixing his eye-glass, and fingering the papers before him.  At
last he said--

"There is something in what you say, my dear, something in what you
say--but not everything--eh, Ladislaw?  You and I don't like our
pictures and statues being found fault with.  Young ladies are a little
ardent, you know--a little one-sided, my dear.  Fine art, poetry, that
kind of thing, elevates a nation--emollit mores--you understand a
little Latin now.  But--eh? what?"

These interrogatives were addressed to the footman who had come in to
say that the keeper had found one of Dagley's boys with a leveret in
his hand just killed.

"I'll come, I'll come.  I shall let him off easily, you know," said Mr.
Brooke aside to Dorothea, shuffling away very cheerfully.

"I hope you feel how right this change is that I--that Sir James wishes
for," said Dorothea to Will, as soon as her uncle was gone.

"I do, now I have heard you speak about it.  I shall not forget what
you have said.  But can you think of something else at this moment?  I
may not have another opportunity of speaking to you about what has
occurred," said Will, rising with a movement of impatience, and holding
the back of his chair with both hands.

"Pray tell me what it is," said Dorothea, anxiously, also rising and
going to the open window, where Monk was looking in, panting and
wagging his tail.  She leaned her back against the window-frame, and
laid her hand on the dog's head; for though, as we know, she was not
fond of pets that must be held in the hands or trodden on, she was
always attentive to the feelings of dogs, and very polite if she had to
decline their advances.

Will followed her only with his eyes and said, "I presume you know that
Mr. Casaubon has forbidden me to go to his house."

"No, I did not," said Dorothea, after a moment's pause.  She was
evidently much moved.  "I am very, very sorry," she added, mournfully.
She was thinking of what Will had no knowledge of--the conversation
between her and her husband in the darkness; and she was anew smitten
with hopelessness that she could influence Mr. Casaubon's action.  But
the marked expression of her sorrow convinced Will that it was not all
given to him personally, and that Dorothea had not been visited by the
idea that Mr. Casaubon's dislike and jealousy of him turned upon
herself.  He felt an odd mixture of delight and vexation: of delight
that he could dwell and be cherished in her thought as in a pure home,
without suspicion and without stint--of vexation because he was of too
little account with her, was not formidable enough, was treated with an
unhesitating benevolence which did not flatter him.  But his dread of
any change in Dorothea was stronger than his discontent, and he began
to speak again in a tone of mere explanation.

"Mr. Casaubon's reason is, his displeasure at my taking a position here
which he considers unsuited to my rank as his cousin.  I have told him
that I cannot give way on this point.  It is a little too hard on me to
expect that my course in life is to be hampered by prejudices which I
think ridiculous.  Obligation may be stretched till it is no better
than a brand of slavery stamped on us when we were too young to know
its meaning.  I would not have accepted the position if I had not meant
to make it useful and honorable.  I am not bound to regard family
dignity in any other light."

Dorothea felt wretched.  She thought her husband altogether in the
wrong, on more grounds than Will had mentioned.

"It is better for us not to speak on the subject," she said, with a
tremulousness not common in her voice, "since you and Mr. Casaubon
disagree.  You intend to remain?"  She was looking out on the lawn,
with melancholy meditation.

"Yes; but I shall hardly ever see you now," said Will, in a tone of
almost boyish complaint.

"No," said Dorothea, turning her eyes full upon him, "hardly ever.  But
I shall hear of you.  I shall know what you are doing for my uncle."

"I shall know hardly anything about you," said Will.  "No one will tell
me anything."

"Oh, my life is very simple," said Dorothea, her lips curling with an
exquisite smile, which irradiated her melancholy.  "I am always at
Lowick."

"That is a dreadful imprisonment," said Will, impetuously.

"No, don't think that," said Dorothea.  "I have no longings."

He did not speak, but she replied to some change in his expression.  "I
mean, for myself.  Except that I should like not to have so much more
than my share without doing anything for others.  But I have a belief
of my own, and it comforts me."

"What is that?" said Will, rather jealous of the belief.

"That by desiring what is perfectly good, even when we don't quite know
what it is and cannot do what we would, we are part of the divine power
against evil--widening the skirts of light and making the struggle with
darkness narrower."

"That is a beautiful mysticism--it is a--"

"Please not to call it by any name," said Dorothea, putting out her
hands entreatingly.  "You will say it is Persian, or something else
geographical.  It is my life.  I have found it out, and cannot part
with it.  I have always been finding out my religion since I was a
little girl.  I used to pray so much--now I hardly ever pray.  I try
not to have desires merely for myself, because they may not be good for
others, and I have too much already.  I only told you, that you might
know quite well how my days go at Lowick."

"God bless you for telling me!" said Will, ardently, and rather
wondering at himself.  They were looking at each other like two fond
children who were talking confidentially of birds.

"What is _your_ religion?" said Dorothea.  "I mean--not what you know
about religion, but the belief that helps you most?"

"To love what is good and beautiful when I see it," said Will.  "But I
am a rebel: I don't feel bound, as you do, to submit to what I don't
like."

"But if you like what is good, that comes to the same thing," said
Dorothea, smiling.

"Now you are subtle," said Will.

"Yes; Mr. Casaubon often says I am too subtle.  I don't feel as if I
were subtle," said Dorothea, playfully.  "But how long my uncle is!  I
must go and look for him.  I must really go on to the Hall.  Celia is
expecting me."

Will offered to tell Mr. Brooke, who presently came and said that he
would step into the carriage and go with Dorothea as far as Dagley's,
to speak about the small delinquent who had been caught with the
leveret.  Dorothea renewed the subject of the estate as they drove
along, but Mr. Brooke, not being taken unawares, got the talk under his
own control.

"Chettam, now," he replied; "he finds fault with me, my dear; but I
should not preserve my game if it were not for Chettam, and he can't
say that that expense is for the sake of the tenants, you know.  It's a
little against my feeling:--poaching, now, if you come to look into
it--I have often thought of getting up the subject.  Not long ago,
Flavell, the Methodist preacher, was brought up for knocking down a
hare that came across his path when he and his wife were walking out
together.  He was pretty quick, and knocked it on the neck."

"That was very brutal, I think," said Dorothea

"Well, now, it seemed rather black to me, I confess, in a Methodist
preacher, you know.  And Johnson said, 'You may judge what a
_hypocrite_ he is.'  And upon my word, I thought Flavell looked very
little like 'the highest style of man'--as somebody calls the
Christian--Young, the poet Young, I think--you know Young?  Well, now,
Flavell in his shabby black gaiters, pleading that he thought the Lord
had sent him and his wife a good dinner, and he had a right to knock it
down, though not a mighty hunter before the Lord, as Nimrod was--I
assure you it was rather comic: Fielding would have made something of
it--or Scott, now--Scott might have worked it up.  But really, when I
came to think of it, I couldn't help liking that the fellow should have
a bit of hare to say grace over.  It's all a matter of
prejudice--prejudice with the law on its side, you know--about the
stick and the gaiters, and so on.  However, it doesn't do to reason
about things; and law is law.  But I got Johnson to be quiet, and I
hushed the matter up.  I doubt whether Chettam would not have been more
severe, and yet he comes down on me as if I were the hardest man in the
county.  But here we are at Dagley's."

Mr. Brooke got down at a farmyard-gate, and Dorothea drove on.  It is
wonderful how much uglier things will look when we only suspect that we
are blamed for them.  Even our own persons in the glass are apt to
change their aspect for us after we have heard some frank remark on
their less admirable points; and on the other hand it is astonishing
how pleasantly conscience takes our encroachments on those who never
complain or have nobody to complain for them.  Dagley's homestead never
before looked so dismal to Mr. Brooke as it did today, with his mind
thus sore about the fault-finding of the "Trumpet," echoed by Sir James.

It is true that an observer, under that softening influence of the fine
arts which makes other people's hardships picturesque, might have been
delighted with this homestead called Freeman's End: the old house had
dormer-windows in the dark red roof, two of the chimneys were choked
with ivy, the large porch was blocked up with bundles of sticks, and
half the windows were closed with gray worm-eaten shutters about which
the jasmine-boughs grew in wild luxuriance; the mouldering garden wall
with hollyhocks peeping over it was a perfect study of highly mingled
subdued color, and there was an aged goat (kept doubtless on
interesting superstitious grounds) lying against the open back-kitchen
door.  The mossy thatch of the cow-shed, the broken gray barn-doors,
the pauper laborers in ragged breeches who had nearly finished
unloading a wagon of corn into the barn ready for early thrashing; the
scanty dairy of cows being tethered for milking and leaving one half of
the shed in brown emptiness; the very pigs and white ducks seeming to
wander about the uneven neglected yard as if in low spirits from
feeding on a too meagre quality of rinsings,--all these objects under
the quiet light of a sky marbled with high clouds would have made a
sort of picture which we have all paused over as a "charming bit,"
touching other sensibilities than those which are stirred by the
depression of the agricultural interest, with the sad lack of farming
capital, as seen constantly in the newspapers of that time.  But these
troublesome associations were just now strongly present to Mr. Brooke,
and spoiled the scene for him.  Mr. Dagley himself made a figure in the
landscape, carrying a pitchfork and wearing his milking-hat--a very old
beaver flattened in front.  His coat and breeches were the best he had,
and he would not have been wearing them on this weekday occasion if he
had not been to market and returned later than usual, having given
himself the rare treat of dining at the public table of the Blue Bull.
How he came to fall into this extravagance would perhaps be matter of
wonderment to himself on the morrow; but before dinner something in the
state of the country, a slight pause in the harvest before the Far Dips
were cut, the stories about the new King and the numerous handbills on
the walls, had seemed to warrant a little recklessness.  It was a maxim
about Middlemarch, and regarded as self-evident, that good meat should
have good drink, which last Dagley interpreted as plenty of table ale
well followed up by rum-and-water. These liquors have so far truth in
them that they were not false enough to make poor Dagley seem merry:
they only made his discontent less tongue-tied than usual.  He had also
taken too much in the shape of muddy political talk, a stimulant
dangerously disturbing to his farming conservatism, which consisted in
holding that whatever is, is bad, and any change is likely to be worse.
He was flushed, and his eyes had a decidedly quarrelsome stare as he
stood still grasping his pitchfork, while the landlord approached with
his easy shuffling walk, one hand in his trouser-pocket and the other
swinging round a thin walking-stick.

"Dagley, my good fellow," began Mr. Brooke, conscious that he was going
to be very friendly about the boy.

"Oh, ay, I'm a good feller, am I?  Thank ye, sir, thank ye," said
Dagley, with a loud snarling irony which made Fag the sheep-dog stir
from his seat and prick his ears; but seeing Monk enter the yard after
some outside loitering, Fag seated himself again in an attitude of
observation.  "I'm glad to hear I'm a good feller."

Mr. Brooke reflected that it was market-day, and that his worthy tenant
had probably been dining, but saw no reason why he should not go on,
since he could take the precaution of repeating what he had to say to
Mrs. Dagley.

"Your little lad Jacob has been caught killing a leveret, Dagley: I
have told Johnson to lock him up in the empty stable an hour or two,
just to frighten him, you know.  But he will be brought home by-and-by,
before night: and you'll just look after him, will you, and give him a
reprimand, you know?"

"No, I woon't: I'll be dee'd if I'll leather my boy to please you or
anybody else, not if you was twenty landlords istid o' one, and that a
bad un."

Dagley's words were loud enough to summon his wife to the back-kitchen
door--the only entrance ever used, and one always open except in bad
weather--and Mr. Brooke, saying soothingly, "Well, well, I'll speak to
your wife--I didn't mean beating, you know," turned to walk to the
house.  But Dagley, only the more inclined to "have his say" with a
gentleman who walked away from him, followed at once, with Fag
slouching at his heels and sullenly evading some small and probably
charitable advances on the part of Monk.

"How do you do, Mrs. Dagley?" said Mr. Brooke, making some haste.  "I
came to tell you about your boy: I don't want you to give him the
stick, you know."  He was careful to speak quite plainly this time.

Overworked Mrs. Dagley--a thin, worn woman, from whose life pleasure
had so entirely vanished that she had not even any Sunday clothes which
could give her satisfaction in preparing for church--had already had a
misunderstanding with her husband since he had come home, and was in
low spirits, expecting the worst.  But her husband was beforehand in
answering.

"No, nor he woon't hev the stick, whether you want it or no," pursued
Dagley, throwing out his voice, as if he wanted it to hit hard.
"You've got no call to come an' talk about sticks o' these primises, as
you woon't give a stick tow'rt mending.  Go to Middlemarch to ax for
_your_ charrickter."

"You'd far better hold your tongue, Dagley," said the wife, "and not
kick your own trough over.  When a man as is father of a family has
been an' spent money at market and made himself the worse for liquor,
he's done enough mischief for one day.  But I should like to know what
my boy's done, sir."

"Niver do you mind what he's done," said Dagley, more fiercely, "it's
my business to speak, an' not yourn.  An' I wull speak, too.  I'll hev
my say--supper or no.  An' what I say is, as I've lived upo' your
ground from my father and grandfather afore me, an' hev dropped our
money into't, an' me an' my children might lie an' rot on the ground
for top-dressin' as we can't find the money to buy, if the King wasn't
to put a stop."

"My good fellow, you're drunk, you know," said Mr. Brooke,
confidentially but not judiciously.  "Another day, another day," he
added, turning as if to go.

But Dagley immediately fronted him, and Fag at his heels growled low,
as his master's voice grew louder and more insulting, while Monk also
drew close in silent dignified watch.  The laborers on the wagon were
pausing to listen, and it seemed wiser to be quite passive than to
attempt a ridiculous flight pursued by a bawling man.

"I'm no more drunk nor you are, nor so much," said Dagley.  "I can
carry my liquor, an' I know what I meean.  An' I meean as the King 'ull
put a stop to 't, for them say it as knows it, as there's to be a
Rinform, and them landlords as never done the right thing by their
tenants 'ull be treated i' that way as they'll hev to scuttle off.  An'
there's them i' Middlemarch knows what the Rinform is--an' as knows
who'll hev to scuttle.  Says they, 'I know who _your_ landlord is.'
An' says I, 'I hope you're the better for knowin' him, I arn't.' Says
they, 'He's a close-fisted un.' 'Ay ay,' says I. 'He's a man for the
Rinform,' says they.  That's what they says.  An' I made out what the
Rinform were--an' it were to send you an' your likes a-scuttlin' an'
wi' pretty strong-smellin' things too.  An' you may do as you like now,
for I'm none afeard on you.  An' you'd better let my boy aloan, an'
look to yoursen, afore the Rinform has got upo' your back.  That's what
I'n got to say," concluded Mr. Dagley, striking his fork into the
ground with a firmness which proved inconvenient as he tried to draw it
up again.

At this last action Monk began to bark loudly, and it was a moment for
Mr. Brooke to escape.  He walked out of the yard as quickly as he
could, in some amazement at the novelty of his situation.  He had never
been insulted on his own land before, and had been inclined to regard
himself as a general favorite (we are all apt to do so, when we think
of our own amiability more than of what other people are likely to want
of us). When he had quarrelled with Caleb Garth twelve years before he
had thought that the tenants would be pleased at the landlord's taking
everything into his own hands.

Some who follow the narrative of his experience may wonder at the
midnight darkness of Mr. Dagley; but nothing was easier in those times
than for an hereditary farmer of his grade to be ignorant, in spite
somehow of having a rector in the twin parish who was a gentleman to
the backbone, a curate nearer at hand who preached more learnedly than
the rector, a landlord who had gone into everything, especially fine
art and social improvement, and all the lights of Middlemarch only
three miles off.  As to the facility with which mortals escape
knowledge, try an average acquaintance in the intellectual blaze of
London, and consider what that eligible person for a dinner-party would
have been if he had learned scant skill in "summing" from the
parish-clerk of Tipton, and read a chapter in the Bible with immense
difficulty, because such names as Isaiah or Apollos remained
unmanageable after twice spelling.  Poor Dagley read a few verses
sometimes on a Sunday evening, and the world was at least not darker to
him than it had been before.  Some things he knew thoroughly, namely,
the slovenly habits of farming, and the awkwardness of weather, stock
and crops, at Freeman's End--so called apparently by way of sarcasm,
to imply that a man was free to quit it if he chose, but that there was
no earthly "beyond" open to him.



CHAPTER XL.

    Wise in his daily work was he:
      To fruits of diligence,
    And not to faiths or polity,
      He plied his utmost sense.
    These perfect in their little parts,
      Whose work is all their prize--
    Without them how could laws, or arts,
      Or towered cities rise?


In watching effects, if only of an electric battery, it is often
necessary to change our place and examine a particular mixture or group
at some distance from the point where the movement we are interested in
was set up.  The group I am moving towards is at Caleb Garth's
breakfast-table in the large parlor where the maps and desk were:
father, mother, and five of the children.  Mary was just now at home
waiting for a situation, while Christy, the boy next to her, was
getting cheap learning and cheap fare in Scotland, having to his
father's disappointment taken to books instead of that sacred calling
"business."

The letters had come--nine costly letters, for which the postman had
been paid three and twopence, and Mr. Garth was forgetting his tea and
toast while he read his letters and laid them open one above the other,
sometimes swaying his head slowly, sometimes screwing up his mouth in
inward debate, but not forgetting to cut off a large red seal unbroken,
which Letty snatched up like an eager terrier.

The talk among the rest went on unrestrainedly, for nothing disturbed
Caleb's absorption except shaking the table when he was writing.

Two letters of the nine had been for Mary.  After reading them, she had
passed them to her mother, and sat playing with her tea-spoon absently,
till with a sudden recollection she returned to her sewing, which she
had kept on her lap during breakfast.

"Oh, don't sew, Mary!" said Ben, pulling her arm down.  "Make me a
peacock with this bread-crumb." He had been kneading a small mass for
the purpose.

"No, no, Mischief!" said Mary, good-humoredly, while she pricked his
hand lightly with her needle.  "Try and mould it yourself: you have
seen me do it often enough.  I must get this sewing done.  It is for
Rosamond Vincy: she is to be married next week, and she can't be
married without this handkerchief."  Mary ended merrily, amused with
the last notion.

"Why can't she, Mary?" said Letty, seriously interested in this
mystery, and pushing her head so close to her sister that Mary now
turned the threatening needle towards Letty's nose.

"Because this is one of a dozen, and without it there would only be
eleven," said Mary, with a grave air of explanation, so that Letty sank
back with a sense of knowledge.

"Have you made up your mind, my dear?" said Mrs. Garth, laying the
letters down.

"I shall go to the school at York," said Mary.  "I am less unfit to
teach in a school than in a family.  I like to teach classes best.
And, you see, I must teach: there is nothing else to be done."

"Teaching seems to me the most delightful work in the world," said Mrs.
Garth, with a touch of rebuke in her tone.  "I could understand your
objection to it if you had not knowledge enough, Mary, or if you
disliked children."

"I suppose we never quite understand why another dislikes what we like,
mother," said Mary, rather curtly.  "I am not fond of a schoolroom: I
like the outside world better.  It is a very inconvenient fault of
mine."

"It must be very stupid to be always in a girls' school," said Alfred.
"Such a set of nincompoops, like Mrs. Ballard's pupils walking two and
two."

"And they have no games worth playing at," said Jim.  "They can neither
throw nor leap.  I don't wonder at Mary's not liking it."

"What is that Mary doesn't like, eh?" said the father, looking over his
spectacles and pausing before he opened his next letter.

"Being among a lot of nincompoop girls," said Alfred.

"Is it the situation you had heard of, Mary?" said Caleb, gently,
looking at his daughter.

"Yes, father: the school at York.  I have determined to take it.  It is
quite the best.  Thirty-five pounds a-year, and extra pay for teaching
the smallest strummers at the piano."

"Poor child!  I wish she could stay at home with us, Susan," said
Caleb, looking plaintively at his wife.

"Mary would not be happy without doing her duty," said Mrs. Garth,
magisterially, conscious of having done her own.

"It wouldn't make me happy to do such a nasty duty as that," said
Alfred--at which Mary and her father laughed silently, but Mrs. Garth
said, gravely--

"Do find a fitter word than nasty, my dear Alfred, for everything that
you think disagreeable.  And suppose that Mary could help you to go to
Mr. Hanmer's with the money she gets?"

"That seems to me a great shame.  But she's an old brick," said Alfred,
rising from his chair, and pulling Mary's head backward to kiss her.

Mary colored and laughed, but could not conceal that the tears were
coming.  Caleb, looking on over his spectacles, with the angles of his
eyebrows falling, had an expression of mingled delight and sorrow as he
returned to the opening of his letter; and even Mrs. Garth, her lips
curling with a calm contentment, allowed that inappropriate language to
pass without correction, although Ben immediately took it up, and sang,
"She's an old brick, old brick, old brick!" to a cantering measure,
which he beat out with his fist on Mary's arm.

But Mrs. Garth's eyes were now drawn towards her husband, who was
already deep in the letter he was reading.  His face had an expression
of grave surprise, which alarmed her a little, but he did not like to
be questioned while he was reading, and she remained anxiously watching
till she saw him suddenly shaken by a little joyous laugh as he turned
back to the beginning of the letter, and looking at her above his
spectacles, said, in a low tone, "What do you think, Susan?"

She went and stood behind him, putting her hand on his shoulder, while
they read the letter together.  It was from Sir James Chettam, offering
to Mr. Garth the management of the family estates at Freshitt and
elsewhere, and adding that Sir James had been requested by Mr. Brooke
of Tipton to ascertain whether Mr. Garth would be disposed at the same
time to resume the agency of the Tipton property.  The Baronet added in
very obliging words that he himself was particularly desirous of seeing
the Freshitt and Tipton estates under the same management, and he hoped
to be able to show that the double agency might be held on terms
agreeable to Mr. Garth, whom he would be glad to see at the Hall at
twelve o'clock on the following day.

"He writes handsomely, doesn't he, Susan?" said Caleb, turning his eyes
upward to his wife, who raised her hand from his shoulder to his ear,
while she rested her chin on his head.  "Brooke didn't like to ask me
himself, I can see," he continued, laughing silently.

"Here is an honor to your father, children," said Mrs. Garth, looking
round at the five pair of eyes, all fixed on the parents.  "He is asked
to take a post again by those who dismissed him long ago.  That shows
that he did his work well, so that they feel the want of him."

"Like Cincinnatus--hooray!" said Ben, riding on his chair, with a
pleasant confidence that discipline was relaxed.

"Will they come to fetch him, mother?" said Letty, thinking of the
Mayor and Corporation in their robes.

Mrs. Garth patted Letty's head and smiled, but seeing that her husband
was gathering up his letters and likely soon to be out of reach in that
sanctuary "business," she pressed his shoulder and said emphatically--

"Now, mind you ask fair pay, Caleb."

"Oh yes," said Caleb, in a deep voice of assent, as if it would be
unreasonable to suppose anything else of him.  "It'll come to between
four and five hundred, the two together."  Then with a little start of
remembrance he said, "Mary, write and give up that school.  Stay and
help your mother.  I'm as pleased as Punch, now I've thought of that."

No manner could have been less like that of Punch triumphant than
Caleb's, but his talents did not lie in finding phrases, though he was
very particular about his letter-writing, and regarded his wife as a
treasury of correct language.

There was almost an uproar among the children now, and Mary held up the
cambric embroidery towards her mother entreatingly, that it might be
put out of reach while the boys dragged her into a dance.  Mrs. Garth,
in placid joy, began to put the cups and plates together, while Caleb
pushing his chair from the table, as if he were going to move to the
desk, still sat holding his letters in his hand and looking on the
ground meditatively, stretching out the fingers of his left hand,
according to a mute language of his own.  At last he said--

"It's a thousand pities Christy didn't take to business, Susan.  I
shall want help by-and-by. And Alfred must go off to the
engineering--I've made up my mind to that."  He fell into meditation and
finger-rhetoric again for a little while, and then continued: "I shall
make Brooke have new agreements with the tenants, and I shall draw up a
rotation of crops.  And I'll lay a wager we can get fine bricks out of
the clay at Bott's corner.  I must look into that: it would cheapen the
repairs.  It's a fine bit of work, Susan!  A man without a family would
be glad to do it for nothing."

"Mind you don't, though," said his wife, lifting up her finger.

"No, no; but it's a fine thing to come to a man when he's seen into the
nature of business: to have the chance of getting a bit of the country
into good fettle, as they say, and putting men into the right way with
their farming, and getting a bit of good contriving and solid building
done--that those who are living and those who come after will be the
better for.  I'd sooner have it than a fortune.  I hold it the most
honorable work that is."  Here Caleb laid down his letters, thrust his
fingers between the buttons of his waistcoat, and sat upright, but
presently proceeded with some awe in his voice and moving his head
slowly aside--"It's a great gift of God, Susan."

"That it is, Caleb," said his wife, with answering fervor.  "And it
will be a blessing to your children to have had a father who did such
work: a father whose good work remains though his name may be
forgotten."  She could not say any more to him then about the pay.

In the evening, when Caleb, rather tired with his day's work, was
seated in silence with his pocket-book open on his knee, while Mrs.
Garth and Mary were at their sewing, and Letty in a corner was
whispering a dialogue with her doll, Mr. Farebrother came up the
orchard walk, dividing the bright August lights and shadows with the
tufted grass and the apple-tree boughs.  We know that he was fond of
his parishioners the Garths, and had thought Mary worth mentioning to
Lydgate.  He used to the full the clergyman's privilege of disregarding
the Middlemarch discrimination of ranks, and always told his mother
that Mrs. Garth was more of a lady than any matron in the town.  Still,
you see, he spent his evenings at the Vincys', where the matron, though
less of a lady, presided over a well-lit drawing-room and whist.  In
those days human intercourse was not determined solely by respect.  But
the Vicar did heartily respect the Garths, and a visit from him was no
surprise to that family.  Nevertheless he accounted for it even while
he was shaking hands, by saying, "I come as an envoy, Mrs. Garth: I
have something to say to you and Garth on behalf of Fred Vincy.  The
fact is, poor fellow," he continued, as he seated himself and looked
round with his bright glance at the three who were listening to him,
"he has taken me into his confidence."

Mary's heart beat rather quickly: she wondered how far Fred's
confidence had gone.

"We haven't seen the lad for months," said Caleb.  "I couldn't think
what was become of him."

"He has been away on a visit," said the Vicar, "because home was a
little too hot for him, and Lydgate told his mother that the poor
fellow must not begin to study yet.  But yesterday he came and poured
himself out to me.  I am very glad he did, because I have seen him grow
up from a youngster of fourteen, and I am so much at home in the house
that the children are like nephews and nieces to me.  But it is a
difficult case to advise upon.  However, he has asked me to come and
tell you that he is going away, and that he is so miserable about his
debt to you, and his inability to pay, that he can't bear to come
himself even to bid you good by."

"Tell him it doesn't signify a farthing," said Caleb, waving his hand.
"We've had the pinch and have got over it.  And now I'm going to be as
rich as a Jew."

"Which means," said Mrs. Garth, smiling at the Vicar, "that we are
going to have enough to bring up the boys well and to keep Mary at
home."

"What is the treasure-trove?" said Mr. Farebrother.

"I'm going to be agent for two estates, Freshitt and Tipton; and
perhaps for a pretty little bit of land in Lowick besides: it's all the
same family connection, and employment spreads like water if it's once
set going.  It makes me very happy, Mr. Farebrother"--here Caleb threw
back his head a little, and spread his arms on the elbows of his
chair--"that I've got an opportunity again with the letting of the
land, and carrying out a notion or two with improvements.  It's a most
uncommonly cramping thing, as I've often told Susan, to sit on
horseback and look over the hedges at the wrong thing, and not be able
to put your hand to it to make it right.  What people do who go into
politics I can't think: it drives me almost mad to see mismanagement
over only a few hundred acres."

It was seldom that Caleb volunteered so long a speech, but his
happiness had the effect of mountain air: his eyes were bright, and the
words came without effort.

"I congratulate you heartily, Garth," said the Vicar.  "This is the
best sort of news I could have had to carry to Fred Vincy, for he dwelt
a good deal on the injury he had done you in causing you to part with
money--robbing you of it, he said--which you wanted for other purposes.
I wish Fred were not such an idle dog; he has some very good points,
and his father is a little hard upon him."

"Where is he going?" said Mrs. Garth, rather coldly.

"He means to try again for his degree, and he is going up to study
before term.  I have advised him to do that.  I don't urge him to enter
the Church--on the contrary.  But if he will go and work so as to pass,
that will be some guarantee that he has energy and a will; and he is
quite at sea; he doesn't know what else to do.  So far he will please
his father, and I have promised in the mean time to try and reconcile
Vincy to his son's adopting some other line of life.  Fred says frankly
he is not fit for a clergyman, and I would do anything I could to
hinder a man from the fatal step of choosing the wrong profession.  He
quoted to me what you said, Miss Garth--do you remember it?"  (Mr.
Farebrother used to say "Mary" instead of "Miss Garth," but it was part
of his delicacy to treat her with the more deference because, according
to Mrs. Vincy's phrase, she worked for her bread.)

Mary felt uncomfortable, but, determined to take the matter lightly,
answered at once, "I have said so many impertinent things to Fred--we
are such old playfellows."

"You said, according to him, that he would be one of those ridiculous
clergymen who help to make the whole clergy ridiculous.  Really, that
was so cutting that I felt a little cut myself."

Caleb laughed.  "She gets her tongue from you, Susan," he said, with
some enjoyment.

"Not its flippancy, father," said Mary, quickly, fearing that her
mother would be displeased.  "It is rather too bad of Fred to repeat my
flippant speeches to Mr. Farebrother."

"It was certainly a hasty speech, my dear," said Mrs. Garth, with whom
speaking evil of dignities was a high misdemeanor.  "We should not
value our Vicar the less because there was a ridiculous curate in the
next parish."

"There's something in what she says, though," said Caleb, not disposed
to have Mary's sharpness undervalued.  "A bad workman of any sort makes
his fellows mistrusted.  Things hang together," he added, looking on
the floor and moving his feet uneasily with a sense that words were
scantier than thoughts.

"Clearly," said the Vicar, amused.  "By being contemptible we set men's
minds, to the tune of contempt.  I certainly agree with Miss Garth's
view of the matter, whether I am condemned by it or not.  But as to
Fred Vincy, it is only fair he should be excused a little: old
Featherstone's delusive behavior did help to spoil him.  There was
something quite diabolical in not leaving him a farthing after all.
But Fred has the good taste not to dwell on that.  And what he cares
most about is having offended you, Mrs. Garth; he supposes you will
never think well of him again."

"I have been disappointed in Fred," said Mrs. Garth, with decision.
"But I shall be ready to think well of him again when he gives me good
reason to do so."

At this point Mary went out of the room, taking Letty with her.

"Oh, we must forgive young people when they're sorry," said Caleb,
watching Mary close the door.  "And as you say, Mr. Farebrother, there
was the very devil in that old man. Now Mary's gone out, I must tell you
a thing--it's only known to Susan and me, and you'll not tell it again.
The old scoundrel wanted Mary to burn one of the wills the very night
he died, when she was sitting up with him by herself, and he offered her
a sum of money that he had in the box by him if she would do it.  But Mary,
you understand, could do no such thing--would not be handling his iron
chest, and so on.  Now, you see, the will he wanted burnt was this last,
so that if Mary had done what he wanted, Fred Vincy would have had ten
thousand pounds. The old man did turn to him at the last.  That touches
poor Mary close; she couldn't help it--she was in the right to do what
she did, but she feels, as she says, much as if she had knocked down
somebody's property and broken it against her will, when she was
rightfully defending herself.  I feel with her, somehow, and if I could
make any amends to the poor lad, instead of bearing him a grudge for
the harm he did us, I should be glad to do it.  Now, what is your opinion,
sir?  Susan doesn't agree with me.  She says--tell what you say, Susan."

"Mary could not have acted otherwise, even if she had known what would
be the effect on Fred," said Mrs. Garth, pausing from her work, and
looking at Mr. Farebrother.

"And she was quite ignorant of it.  It seems to me, a loss which falls
on another because we have done right is not to lie upon our
conscience."

The Vicar did not answer immediately, and Caleb said, "It's the
feeling.  The child feels in that way, and I feel with her.  You don't
mean your horse to tread on a dog when you're backing out of the way;
but it goes through you, when it's done."

"I am sure Mrs. Garth would agree with you there," said Mr.
Farebrother, who for some reason seemed more inclined to ruminate than
to speak.  "One could hardly say that the feeling you mention about
Fred is wrong--or rather, mistaken--though no man ought to make a claim
on such feeling."

"Well, well," said Caleb, "it's a secret.  You will not tell Fred."

"Certainly not.  But I shall carry the other good news--that you can
afford the loss he caused you."

Mr. Farebrother left the house soon after, and seeing Mary in the
orchard with Letty, went to say good-by to her.  They made a pretty
picture in the western light which brought out the brightness of the
apples on the old scant-leaved boughs--Mary in her lavender gingham and
black ribbons holding a basket, while Letty in her well-worn nankin
picked up the fallen apples.  If you want to know more particularly how
Mary looked, ten to one you will see a face like hers in the crowded
street to-morrow, if you are there on the watch: she will not be among
those daughters of Zion who are haughty, and walk with stretched-out
necks and wanton eyes, mincing as they go: let all those pass, and fix
your eyes on some small plump brownish person of firm but quiet
carriage, who looks about her, but does not suppose that anybody is
looking at her.  If she has a broad face and square brow, well-marked
eyebrows and curly dark hair, a certain expression of amusement in her
glance which her mouth keeps the secret of, and for the rest features
entirely insignificant--take that ordinary but not disagreeable person
for a portrait of Mary Garth.  If you made her smile, she would show
you perfect little teeth; if you made her angry, she would not raise
her voice, but would probably say one of the bitterest things you have
ever tasted the flavor of; if you did her a kindness, she would never
forget it.  Mary admired the keen-faced handsome little Vicar in his
well-brushed threadbare clothes more than any man she had had the
opportunity of knowing.  She had never heard him say a foolish thing,
though she knew that he did unwise ones; and perhaps foolish sayings
were more objectionable to her than any of Mr. Farebrother's unwise
doings.  At least, it was remarkable that the actual imperfections of
the Vicar's clerical character never seemed to call forth the same
scorn and dislike which she showed beforehand for the predicted
imperfections of the clerical character sustained by Fred Vincy.  These
irregularities of judgment, I imagine, are found even in riper minds
than Mary Garth's: our impartiality is kept for abstract merit and
demerit, which none of us ever saw.  Will any one guess towards which
of those widely different men Mary had the peculiar woman's
tenderness?--the one she was most inclined to be severe on, or the
contrary?

"Have you any message for your old playfellow, Miss Garth?" said the
Vicar, as he took a fragrant apple from the basket which she held
towards him, and put it in his pocket.  "Something to soften down that
harsh judgment?  I am going straight to see him."

"No," said Mary, shaking her head, and smiling.  "If I were to say that
he would not be ridiculous as a clergyman, I must say that he would be
something worse than ridiculous.  But I am very glad to hear that he is
going away to work."

"On the other hand, I am very glad to hear that _you_ are not going
away to work.  My mother, I am sure, will be all the happier if you
will come to see her at the vicarage: you know she is fond of having
young people to talk to, and she has a great deal to tell about old
times.  You will really be doing a kindness."

"I should like it very much, if I may," said Mary.  "Everything seems
too happy for me all at once.  I thought it would always be part of my
life to long for home, and losing that grievance makes me feel rather
empty: I suppose it served instead of sense to fill up my mind?"

"May I go with you, Mary?" whispered Letty--a most inconvenient child,
who listened to everything.  But she was made exultant by having her
chin pinched and her cheek kissed by Mr. Farebrother--an incident
which she narrated to her mother and father.

As the Vicar walked to Lowick, any one watching him closely might have
seen him twice shrug his shoulders.  I think that the rare Englishmen
who have this gesture are never of the heavy type--for fear of any
lumbering instance to the contrary, I will say, hardly ever; they have
usually a fine temperament and much tolerance towards the smaller
errors of men (themselves inclusive). The Vicar was holding an inward
dialogue in which he told himself that there was probably something
more between Fred and Mary Garth than the regard of old playfellows,
and replied with a question whether that bit of womanhood were not a
great deal too choice for that crude young gentleman.  The rejoinder to
this was the first shrug.  Then he laughed at himself for being likely
to have felt jealous, as if he had been a man able to marry, which,
added he, it is as clear as any balance-sheet that I am not.  Whereupon
followed the second shrug.

What could two men, so different from each other, see in this "brown
patch," as Mary called herself?  It was certainly not her plainness
that attracted them (and let all plain young ladies be warned against
the dangerous encouragement given them by Society to confide in their
want of beauty). A human being in this aged nation of ours is a very
wonderful whole, the slow creation of long interchanging influences:
and charm is a result of two such wholes, the one loving and the one
loved.

When Mr. and Mrs. Garth were sitting alone, Caleb said, "Susan, guess
what I'm thinking of."

"The rotation of crops," said Mrs. Garth, smiling at him, above her
knitting, "or else the back-doors of the Tipton cottages."

"No," said Caleb, gravely; "I am thinking that I could do a great turn
for Fred Vincy.  Christy's gone, Alfred will be gone soon, and it will
be five years before Jim is ready to take to business.  I shall want
help, and Fred might come in and learn the nature of things and act
under me, and it might be the making of him into a useful man, if he
gives up being a parson.  What do you think?"

"I think, there is hardly anything honest that his family would object
to more," said Mrs. Garth, decidedly.

"What care I about their objecting?" said Caleb, with a sturdiness
which he was apt to show when he had an opinion.  "The lad is of age
and must get his bread.  He has sense enough and quickness enough; he
likes being on the land, and it's my belief that he could learn
business well if he gave his mind to it."

"But would he?  His father and mother wanted him to be a fine
gentleman, and I think he has the same sort of feeling himself.  They
all think us beneath them.  And if the proposal came from you, I am
sure Mrs. Vincy would say that we wanted Fred for Mary."

"Life is a poor tale, if it is to be settled by nonsense of that sort,"
said Caleb, with disgust.

"Yes, but there is a certain pride which is proper, Caleb."

"I call it improper pride to let fools' notions hinder you from doing a
good action.  There's no sort of work," said Caleb, with fervor,
putting out his hand and moving it up and down to mark his emphasis,
"that could ever be done well, if you minded what fools say.  You must
have it inside you that your plan is right, and that plan you must
follow."

"I will not oppose any plan you have set your mind on, Caleb," said
Mrs. Garth, who was a firm woman, but knew that there were some points
on which her mild husband was yet firmer.  "Still, it seems to be fixed
that Fred is to go back to college: will it not be better to wait and
see what he will choose to do after that?  It is not easy to keep
people against their will.  And you are not yet quite sure enough of
your own position, or what you will want."

"Well, it may be better to wait a bit.  But as to my getting plenty of
work for two, I'm pretty sure of that.  I've always had my hands full
with scattered things, and there's always something fresh turning up.
Why, only yesterday--bless me, I don't think I told you!--it was rather
odd that two men should have been at me on different sides to do the
same bit of valuing.  And who do you think they were?" said Caleb,
taking a pinch of snuff and holding it up between his fingers, as if it
were a part of his exposition.  He was fond of a pinch when it occurred
to him, but he usually forgot that this indulgence was at his command.

His wife held down her knitting and looked attentive.

"Why, that Rigg, or Rigg Featherstone, was one.  But Bulstrode was
before him, so I'm going to do it for Bulstrode.  Whether it's mortgage
or purchase they're going for, I can't tell yet."

"Can that man be going to sell the land just left him--which he has
taken the name for?" said Mrs. Garth.

"Deuce knows," said Caleb, who never referred the knowledge of
discreditable doings to any higher power than the deuce.  "But
Bulstrode has long been wanting to get a handsome bit of land under his
fingers--that I know.  And it's a difficult matter to get, in this part
of the country."

Caleb scattered his snuff carefully instead of taking it, and then
added, "The ins and outs of things are curious.  Here is the land
they've been all along expecting for Fred, which it seems the old man
never meant to leave him a foot of, but left it to this side-slip of a
son that he kept in the dark, and thought of his sticking there and
vexing everybody as well as he could have vexed 'em himself if he could
have kept alive.  I say, it would be curious if it got into Bulstrode's
hands after all.  The old man hated him, and never would bank with him."

"What reason could the miserable creature have for hating a man whom he
had nothing to do with?" said Mrs. Garth.

"Pooh! where's the use of asking for such fellows' reasons?  The soul
of man," said Caleb, with the deep tone and grave shake of the head
which always came when he used this phrase--"The soul of man, when it
gets fairly rotten, will bear you all sorts of poisonous toad-stools,
and no eye can see whence came the seed thereof."

It was one of Caleb's quaintnesses, that in his difficulty of finding
speech for his thought, he caught, as it were, snatches of diction
which he associated with various points of view or states of mind; and
whenever he had a feeling of awe, he was haunted by a sense of Biblical
phraseology, though he could hardly have given a strict quotation.



CHAPTER XLI.

    "By swaggering could I never thrive,
     For the rain it raineth every day.
                            --Twelfth Night


The transactions referred to by Caleb Garth as having gone forward
between Mr. Bulstrode and Mr. Joshua Rigg Featherstone concerning the
land attached to Stone Court, had occasioned the interchange of a
letter or two between these personages.

Who shall tell what may be the effect of writing?  If it happens to
have been cut in stone, though it lie face down-most for ages on a
forsaken beach, or "rest quietly under the drums and tramplings of many
conquests," it may end by letting us into the secret of usurpations and
other scandals gossiped about long empires ago:--this world being
apparently a huge whispering-gallery. Such conditions are often
minutely represented in our petty lifetimes.  As the stone which has
been kicked by generations of clowns may come by curious little links
of effect under the eyes of a scholar, through whose labors it may at
last fix the date of invasions and unlock religions, so a bit of ink
and paper which has long been an innocent wrapping or stop-gap may at
last be laid open under the one pair of eyes which have knowledge
enough to turn it into the opening of a catastrophe.  To Uriel watching
the progress of planetary history from the sun, the one result would be
just as much of a coincidence as the other.

Having made this rather lofty comparison I am less uneasy in calling
attention to the existence of low people by whose interference, however
little we may like it, the course of the world is very much determined.
It would be well, certainly, if we could help to reduce their number,
and something might perhaps be done by not lightly giving occasion to
their existence.  Socially speaking, Joshua Rigg would have been
generally pronounced a superfluity.  But those who like Peter
Featherstone never had a copy of themselves demanded, are the very last
to wait for such a request either in prose or verse.  The copy in this
case bore more of outside resemblance to the mother, in whose sex
frog-features, accompanied with fresh-colored cheeks and a well-rounded
figure, are compatible with much charm for a certain order of admirers.
The result is sometimes a frog-faced male, desirable, surely, to no
order of intelligent beings.  Especially when he is suddenly brought
into evidence to frustrate other people's expectations--the very
lowest aspect in which a social superfluity can present himself.

But Mr. Rigg Featherstone's low characteristics were all of the sober,
water-drinking kind.  From the earliest to the latest hour of the day
he was always as sleek, neat, and cool as the frog he resembled, and
old Peter had secretly chuckled over an offshoot almost more
calculating, and far more imperturbable, than himself.  I will add that
his finger-nails were scrupulously attended to, and that he meant to
marry a well-educated young lady (as yet unspecified) whose person was
good, and whose connections, in a solid middle-class way, were
undeniable.  Thus his nails and modesty were comparable to those of
most gentlemen; though his ambition had been educated only by the
opportunities of a clerk and accountant in the smaller commercial
houses of a seaport.  He thought the rural Featherstones very simple
absurd people, and they in their turn regarded his "bringing up" in a
seaport town as an exaggeration of the monstrosity that their brother
Peter, and still more Peter's property, should have had such belongings.

The garden and gravel approach, as seen from the two windows of the
wainscoted parlor at Stone Court, were never in better trim than now,
when Mr. Rigg Featherstone stood, with his hands behind him, looking
out on these grounds as their master.  But it seemed doubtful whether
he looked out for the sake of contemplation or of turning his back to a
person who stood in the middle of the room, with his legs considerably
apart and his hands in his trouser-pockets: a person in all respects a
contrast to the sleek and cool Rigg.  He was a man obviously on the way
towards sixty, very florid and hairy, with much gray in his bushy
whiskers and thick curly hair, a stoutish body which showed to
disadvantage the somewhat worn joinings of his clothes, and the air of
a swaggerer, who would aim at being noticeable even at a show of
fireworks, regarding his own remarks on any other person's performance
as likely to be more interesting than the performance itself.

His name was John Raffles, and he sometimes wrote jocosely W.A.G.
after his signature, observing when he did so, that he was once taught
by Leonard Lamb of Finsbury who wrote B.A. after his name, and that he,
Raffles, originated the witticism of calling that celebrated principal
Ba-Lamb. Such were the appearance and mental flavor of Mr. Raffles,
both of which seemed to have a stale odor of travellers' rooms in the
commercial hotels of that period.

"Come, now, Josh," he was saying, in a full rumbling tone, "look at it
in this light: here is your poor mother going into the vale of years,
and you could afford something handsome now to make her comfortable."

"Not while you live.  Nothing would make her comfortable while you
live," returned Rigg, in his cool high voice.  "What I give her, you'll
take."

"You bear me a grudge, Josh, that I know.  But come, now--as between
man and man--without humbug--a little capital might enable me to make a
first-rate thing of the shop.  The tobacco trade is growing.  I should
cut my own nose off in not doing the best I could at it.  I should
stick to it like a flea to a fleece for my own sake.  I should always
be on the spot.  And nothing would make your poor mother so happy.
I've pretty well done with my wild oats--turned fifty-five. I want to
settle down in my chimney-corner. And if I once buckled to the tobacco
trade, I could bring an amount of brains and experience to bear on it
that would not be found elsewhere in a hurry.  I don't want to be
bothering you one time after another, but to get things once for all
into the right channel.  Consider that, Josh--as between man and
man--and with your poor mother to be made easy for her life.  I was
always fond of the old woman, by Jove!"

"Have you done?" said Mr. Rigg, quietly, without looking away from the
window.

"Yes, I've done," said Raffles, taking hold of his hat which stood
before him on the table, and giving it a sort of oratorical push.

"Then just listen to me.  The more you say anything, the less I shall
believe it.  The more you want me to do a thing, the more reason I
shall have for never doing it.  Do you think I mean to forget your
kicking me when I was a lad, and eating all the best victual away from
me and my mother?  Do you think I forget your always coming home to
sell and pocket everything, and going off again leaving us in the
lurch?  I should be glad to see you whipped at the cart-tail.  My
mother was a fool to you: she'd no right to give me a father-in-law,
and she's been punished for it.  She shall have her weekly allowance
paid and no more: and that shall be stopped if you dare to come on to
these premises again, or to come into this country after me again.  The
next time you show yourself inside the gates here, you shall be driven
off with the dogs and the wagoner's whip."

As Rigg pronounced the last words he turned round and looked at Raffles
with his prominent frozen eyes.  The contrast was as striking as it
could have been eighteen years before, when Rigg was a most unengaging
kickable boy, and Raffles was the rather thick-set Adonis of bar-rooms
and back-parlors. But the advantage now was on the side of Rigg, and
auditors of this conversation might probably have expected that Raffles
would retire with the air of a defeated dog.  Not at all.  He made a
grimace which was habitual with him whenever he was "out" in a game;
then subsided into a laugh, and drew a brandy-flask from his pocket.

"Come, Josh," he said, in a cajoling tone, "give us a spoonful of
brandy, and a sovereign to pay the way back, and I'll go.  Honor
bright!  I'll go like a bullet, _by_ Jove!"

"Mind," said Rigg, drawing out a bunch of keys, "if I ever see you
again, I shan't speak to you.  I don't own you any more than if I saw a
crow; and if you want to own me you'll get nothing by it but a
character for being what you are--a spiteful, brassy, bullying rogue."

"That's a pity, now, Josh," said Raffles, affecting to scratch his head
and wrinkle his brows upward as if he were nonplussed.  "I'm very fond
of you; _by_ Jove, I am!  There's nothing I like better than plaguing
you--you're so like your mother, and I must do without it.  But the
brandy and the sovereign's a bargain."

He jerked forward the flask and Rigg went to a fine old oaken bureau
with his keys.  But Raffles had reminded himself by his movement with
the flask that it had become dangerously loose from its leather
covering, and catching sight of a folded paper which had fallen within
the fender, he took it up and shoved it under the leather so as to make
the glass firm.

By that time Rigg came forward with a brandy-bottle, filled the flask,
and handed Raffles a sovereign, neither looking at him nor speaking to
him.  After locking up the bureau again, he walked to the window and
gazed out as impassibly as he had done at the beginning of the
interview, while Raffles took a small allowance from the flask, screwed
it up, and deposited it in his side-pocket, with provoking slowness,
making a grimace at his stepson's back.

"Farewell, Josh--and if forever!" said Raffles, turning back his head
as he opened the door.

Rigg saw him leave the grounds and enter the lane.  The gray day had
turned to a light drizzling rain, which freshened the hedgerows and the
grassy borders of the by-roads, and hastened the laborers who were
loading the last shocks of corn.  Raffles, walking with the uneasy gait
of a town loiterer obliged to do a bit of country journeying on foot,
looked as incongruous amid this moist rural quiet and industry as if he
had been a baboon escaped from a menagerie.  But there were none to
stare at him except the long-weaned calves, and none to show dislike of
his appearance except the little water-rats which rustled away at his
approach.

He was fortunate enough when he got on to the highroad to be overtaken
by the stage-coach, which carried him to Brassing; and there he took
the new-made railway, observing to his fellow-passengers that he
considered it pretty well seasoned now it had done for Huskisson.  Mr.
Raffles on most occasions kept up the sense of having been educated at
an academy, and being able, if he chose, to pass well everywhere;
indeed, there was not one of his fellow-men whom he did not feel
himself in a position to ridicule and torment, confident of the
entertainment which he thus gave to all the rest of the company.

He played this part now with as much spirit as if his journey had been
entirely successful, resorting at frequent intervals to his flask.  The
paper with which he had wedged it was a letter signed Nicholas
Bulstrode, but Raffles was not likely to disturb it from its present
useful position.



CHAPTER XLII.

    "How much, methinks, I could despise this man
     Were I not bound in charity against it!
                          --SHAKESPEARE: Henry VIII.


One of the professional calls made by Lydgate soon after his return
from his wedding-journey was to Lowick Manor, in consequence of a
letter which had requested him to fix a time for his visit.

Mr. Casaubon had never put any question concerning the nature of his
illness to Lydgate, nor had he even to Dorothea betrayed any anxiety as
to how far it might be likely to cut short his labors or his life.  On
this point, as on all others, he shrank from pity; and if the suspicion
of being pitied for anything in his lot surmised or known in spite of
himself was embittering, the idea of calling forth a show of compassion
by frankly admitting an alarm or a sorrow was necessarily intolerable
to him.  Every proud mind knows something of this experience, and
perhaps it is only to be overcome by a sense of fellowship deep enough
to make all efforts at isolation seem mean and petty instead of
exalting.

But Mr. Casaubon was now brooding over something through which the
question of his health and life haunted his silence with a more
harassing importunity even than through the autumnal unripeness of his
authorship.  It is true that this last might be called his central
ambition; but there are some kinds of authorship in which by far the
largest result is the uneasy susceptibility accumulated in the
consciousness of the author--one knows of the river by a few streaks
amid a long-gathered deposit of uncomfortable mud.  That was the way
with Mr. Casaubon's hard intellectual labors.  Their most
characteristic result was not the "Key to all Mythologies," but a
morbid consciousness that others did not give him the place which he
had not demonstrably merited--a perpetual suspicious conjecture that
the views entertained of him were not to his advantage--a melancholy
absence of passion in his efforts at achievement, and a passionate
resistance to the confession that he had achieved nothing.

Thus his intellectual ambition which seemed to others to have absorbed
and dried him, was really no security against wounds, least of all
against those which came from Dorothea.  And he had begun now to frame
possibilities for the future which were somehow more embittering to him
than anything his mind had dwelt on before.

Against certain facts he was helpless: against Will Ladislaw's
existence, his defiant stay in the neighborhood of Lowick, and his
flippant state of mind with regard to the possessors of authentic,
well-stamped erudition: against Dorothea's nature, always taking on
some new shape of ardent activity, and even in submission and silence
covering fervid reasons which it was an irritation to think of: against
certain notions and likings which had taken possession of her mind in
relation to subjects that he could not possibly discuss with her.
There was no denying that Dorothea was as virtuous and lovely a young
lady as he could have obtained for a wife; but a young lady turned out
to be something more troublesome than he had conceived.  She nursed
him, she read to him, she anticipated his wants, and was solicitous
about his feelings; but there had entered into the husband's mind the
certainty that she judged him, and that her wifely devotedness was like
a penitential expiation of unbelieving thoughts--was accompanied with a
power of comparison by which himself and his doings were seen too
luminously as a part of things in general.  His discontent passed
vapor-like through all her gentle loving manifestations, and clung to
that inappreciative world which she had only brought nearer to him.

Poor Mr. Casaubon!  This suffering was the harder to bear because it
seemed like a betrayal: the young creature who had worshipped him with
perfect trust had quickly turned into the critical wife; and early
instances of criticism and resentment had made an impression which no
tenderness and submission afterwards could remove.  To his suspicious
interpretation Dorothea's silence now was a suppressed rebellion; a
remark from her which he had not in any way anticipated was an
assertion of conscious superiority; her gentle answers had an
irritating cautiousness in them; and when she acquiesced it was a
self-approved effort of forbearance.  The tenacity with which he strove
to hide this inward drama made it the more vivid for him; as we hear
with the more keenness what we wish others not to hear.

Instead of wondering at this result of misery in Mr. Casaubon, I think
it quite ordinary.  Will not a tiny speck very close to our vision blot
out the glory of the world, and leave only a margin by which we see the
blot?  I know no speck so troublesome as self.  And who, if Mr.
Casaubon had chosen to expound his discontents--his suspicions that he
was not any longer adored without criticism--could have denied that
they were founded on good reasons?  On the contrary, there was a strong
reason to be added, which he had not himself taken explicitly into
account--namely, that he was not unmixedly adorable.  He suspected
this, however, as he suspected other things, without confessing it, and
like the rest of us, felt how soothing it would have been to have a
companion who would never find it out.

This sore susceptibility in relation to Dorothea was thoroughly
prepared before Will Ladislaw had returned to Lowick, and what had
occurred since then had brought Mr. Casaubon's power of suspicious
construction into exasperated activity.  To all the facts which he
knew, he added imaginary facts both present and future which became
more real to him than those because they called up a stronger dislike,
a more predominating bitterness.  Suspicion and jealousy of Will
Ladislaw's intentions, suspicion and jealousy of Dorothea's
impressions, were constantly at their weaving work.  It would be quite
unjust to him to suppose that he could have entered into any coarse
misinterpretation of Dorothea: his own habits of mind and conduct,
quite as much as the open elevation of her nature, saved him from any
such mistake.  What he was jealous of was her opinion, the sway that
might be given to her ardent mind in its judgments, and the future
possibilities to which these might lead her.  As to Will, though until
his last defiant letter he had nothing definite which he would choose
formally to allege against him, he felt himself warranted in believing
that he was capable of any design which could fascinate a rebellious
temper and an undisciplined impulsiveness.  He was quite sure that
Dorothea was the cause of Will's return from Rome, and his
determination to settle in the neighborhood; and he was penetrating
enough to imagine that Dorothea had innocently encouraged this course.
It was as clear as possible that she was ready to be attached to Will
and to be pliant to his suggestions: they had never had a tete-a-tete
without her bringing away from it some new troublesome impression, and
the last interview that Mr. Casaubon was aware of (Dorothea, on
returning from Freshitt Hall, had for the first time been silent about
having seen Will) had led to a scene which roused an angrier feeling
against them both than he had ever known before.  Dorothea's outpouring
of her notions about money, in the darkness of the night, had done
nothing but bring a mixture of more odious foreboding into her
husband's mind.

And there was the shock lately given to his health always sadly present
with him.  He was certainly much revived; he had recovered all his
usual power of work: the illness might have been mere fatigue, and
there might still be twenty years of achievement before him, which
would justify the thirty years of preparation.  That prospect was made
the sweeter by a flavor of vengeance against the hasty sneers of Carp &
Company; for even when Mr. Casaubon was carrying his taper among the
tombs of the past, those modern figures came athwart the dim light, and
interrupted his diligent exploration.  To convince Carp of his mistake,
so that he would have to eat his own words with a good deal of
indigestion, would be an agreeable accident of triumphant authorship,
which the prospect of living to future ages on earth and to all
eternity in heaven could not exclude from contemplation.  Since, thus,
the prevision of his own unending bliss could not nullify the bitter
savors of irritated jealousy and vindictiveness, it is the less
surprising that the probability of a transient earthly bliss for other
persons, when he himself should have entered into glory, had not a
potently sweetening effect.  If the truth should be that some
undermining disease was at work within him, there might be large
opportunity for some people to be the happier when he was gone; and if
one of those people should be Will Ladislaw, Mr. Casaubon objected so
strongly that it seemed as if the annoyance would make part of his
disembodied existence.

This is a very bare and therefore a very incomplete way of putting the
case.  The human soul moves in many channels, and Mr. Casaubon, we
know, had a sense of rectitude and an honorable pride in satisfying the
requirements of honor, which compelled him to find other reasons for
his conduct than those of jealousy and vindictiveness.  The way in
which Mr. Casaubon put the case was this:--"In marrying Dorothea Brooke
I had to care for her well-being in case of my death.  But well-being
is not to be secured by ample, independent possession of property; on
the contrary, occasions might arise in which such possession might
expose her to the more danger.  She is ready prey to any man who knows
how to play adroitly either on her affectionate ardor or her Quixotic
enthusiasm; and a man stands by with that very intention in his mind--a
man with no other principle than transient caprice, and who has a
personal animosity towards me--I am sure of it--an animosity which is
fed by the consciousness of his ingratitude, and which he has
constantly vented in ridicule of which I am as well assured as if I had
heard it.  Even if I live I shall not be without uneasiness as to what
he may attempt through indirect influence.  This man has gained
Dorothea's ear: he has fascinated her attention; he has evidently tried
to impress her mind with the notion that he has claims beyond anything
I have done for him.  If I die--and he is waiting here on the watch for
that--he will persuade her to marry him.  That would be calamity for
her and success for him.  _She_ would not think it calamity: he would
make her believe anything; she has a tendency to immoderate attachment
which she inwardly reproaches me for not responding to, and already her
mind is occupied with his fortunes.  He thinks of an easy conquest and
of entering into my nest.  That I will hinder! Such a marriage would be
fatal to Dorothea.  Has he ever persisted in anything except from
contradiction?  In knowledge he has always tried to be showy at small
cost.  In religion he could be, as long as it suited him, the facile
echo of Dorothea's vagaries.  When was sciolism ever dissociated from
laxity?  I utterly distrust his morals, and it is my duty to hinder to
the utmost the fulfilment of his designs."

The arrangements made by Mr. Casaubon on his marriage left strong
measures open to him, but in ruminating on them his mind inevitably
dwelt so much on the probabilities of his own life that the longing to
get the nearest possible calculation had at last overcome his proud
reticence, and had determined him to ask Lydgate's opinion as to the
nature of his illness.

He had mentioned to Dorothea that Lydgate was coming by appointment at
half-past three, and in answer to her anxious question, whether he had
felt ill, replied,--"No, I merely wish to have his opinion concerning
some habitual symptoms.  You need not see him, my dear.  I shall give
orders that he may be sent to me in the Yew-tree Walk, where I shall be
taking my usual exercise."

When Lydgate entered the Yew-tree Walk he saw Mr. Casaubon slowly
receding with his hands behind him according to his habit, and his head
bent forward.  It was a lovely afternoon; the leaves from the lofty
limes were falling silently across the sombre evergreens, while the
lights and shadows slept side by side: there was no sound but the
cawing of the rooks, which to the accustomed ear is a lullaby, or that
last solemn lullaby, a dirge.  Lydgate, conscious of an energetic frame
in its prime, felt some compassion when the figure which he was likely
soon to overtake turned round, and in advancing towards him showed more
markedly than ever the signs of premature age--the student's bent
shoulders, the emaciated limbs, and the melancholy lines of the mouth.
"Poor fellow," he thought, "some men with his years are like lions; one
can tell nothing of their age except that they are full grown."

"Mr. Lydgate," said Mr. Casaubon, with his invariably polite air, "I am
exceedingly obliged to you for your punctuality.  We will, if you
please, carry on our conversation in walking to and fro."

"I hope your wish to see me is not due to the return of unpleasant
symptoms," said Lydgate, filling up a pause.

"Not immediately--no.  In order to account for that wish I must
mention--what it were otherwise needless to refer to--that my life, on
all collateral accounts insignificant, derives a possible importance
from the incompleteness of labors which have extended through all its
best years.  In short, I have long had on hand a work which I would
fain leave behind me in such a state, at least, that it might be
committed to the press by--others.  Were I assured that this is the
utmost I can reasonably expect, that assurance would be a useful
circumscription of my attempts, and a guide in both the positive and
negative determination of my course."

Here Mr. Casaubon paused, removed one hand from his back and thrust it
between the buttons of his single-breasted coat.  To a mind largely
instructed in the human destiny hardly anything could be more
interesting than the inward conflict implied in his formal measured
address, delivered with the usual sing-song and motion of the head.
Nay, are there many situations more sublimely tragic than the struggle
of the soul with the demand to renounce a work which has been all the
significance of its life--a significance which is to vanish as the
waters which come and go where no man has need of them?  But there was
nothing to strike others as sublime about Mr. Casaubon, and Lydgate,
who had some contempt at hand for futile scholarship, felt a little
amusement mingling with his pity.  He was at present too ill acquainted
with disaster to enter into the pathos of a lot where everything is
below the level of tragedy except the passionate egoism of the sufferer.

"You refer to the possible hindrances from want of health?" he said,
wishing to help forward Mr. Casaubon's purpose, which seemed to be
clogged by some hesitation.

"I do.  You have not implied to me that the symptoms which--I am bound
to testify--you watched with scrupulous care, were those of a fatal
disease.  But were it so, Mr. Lydgate, I should desire to know the
truth without reservation, and I appeal to you for an exact statement
of your conclusions: I request it as a friendly service.  If you can
tell me that my life is not threatened by anything else than ordinary
casualties, I shall rejoice, on grounds which I have already indicated.
If not, knowledge of the truth is even more important to me."

"Then I can no longer hesitate as to my course," said Lydgate; "but the
first thing I must impress on you is that my conclusions are doubly
uncertain--uncertain not only because of my fallibility, but because
diseases of the heart are eminently difficult to found predictions on.
In any case, one can hardly increase appreciably the tremendous
uncertainty of life."

Mr. Casaubon winced perceptibly, but bowed.

"I believe that you are suffering from what is called fatty
degeneration of the heart, a disease which was first divined and
explored by Laennec, the man who gave us the stethoscope, not so very
many years ago.  A good deal of experience--a more lengthened
observation--is wanting on the subject.  But after what you have said,
it is my duty to tell you that death from this disease is often sudden.
At the same time, no such result can be predicted.  Your condition may
be consistent with a tolerably comfortable life for another fifteen
years, or even more.  I could add no information to this beyond
anatomical or medical details, which would leave expectation at
precisely the same point." Lydgate's instinct was fine enough to tell
him that plain speech, quite free from ostentatious caution, would be
felt by Mr. Casaubon as a tribute of respect.

"I thank you, Mr. Lydgate," said Mr. Casaubon, after a moment's pause.
"One thing more I have still to ask: did you communicate what you have
now told me to Mrs. Casaubon?"

"Partly--I mean, as to the possible issues."  Lydgate was going to
explain why he had told Dorothea, but Mr. Casaubon, with an
unmistakable desire to end the conversation, waved his hand slightly,
and said again, "I thank you," proceeding to remark on the rare beauty
of the day.

Lydgate, certain that his patient wished to be alone, soon left him;
and the black figure with hands behind and head bent forward continued
to pace the walk where the dark yew-trees gave him a mute companionship
in melancholy, and the little shadows of bird or leaf that fleeted
across the isles of sunlight, stole along in silence as in the presence
of a sorrow.  Here was a man who now for the first time found himself
looking into the eyes of death--who was passing through one of those
rare moments of experience when we feel the truth of a commonplace,
which is as different from what we call knowing it, as the vision of
waters upon the earth is different from the delirious vision of the
water which cannot be had to cool the burning tongue.  When the
commonplace "We must all die" transforms itself suddenly into the acute
consciousness "I must die--and soon," then death grapples us, and his
fingers are cruel; afterwards, he may come to fold us in his arms as
our mother did, and our last moment of dim earthly discerning may be
like the first.  To Mr. Casaubon now, it was as if he suddenly found
himself on the dark river-brink and heard the plash of the oncoming
oar, not discerning the forms, but expecting the summons.  In such an
hour the mind does not change its lifelong bias, but carries it onward
in imagination to the other side of death, gazing backward--perhaps
with the divine calm of beneficence, perhaps with the petty anxieties
of self-assertion. What was Mr. Casaubon's bias his acts will give us a
clew to.  He held himself to be, with some private scholarly
reservations, a believing Christian, as to estimates of the present and
hopes of the future.  But what we strive to gratify, though we may call
it a distant hope, is an immediate desire: the future estate for which
men drudge up city alleys exists already in their imagination and love.
And Mr. Casaubon's immediate desire was not for divine communion and
light divested of earthly conditions; his passionate longings, poor
man, clung low and mist-like in very shady places.

Dorothea had been aware when Lydgate had ridden away, and she had
stepped into the garden, with the impulse to go at once to her husband.
But she hesitated, fearing to offend him by obtruding herself; for her
ardor, continually repulsed, served, with her intense memory, to
heighten her dread, as thwarted energy subsides into a shudder; and she
wandered slowly round the nearer clumps of trees until she saw him
advancing.  Then she went towards him, and might have represented a
heaven-sent angel coming with a promise that the short hours remaining
should yet be filled with that faithful love which clings the closer to
a comprehended grief.  His glance in reply to hers was so chill that
she felt her timidity increased; yet she turned and passed her hand
through his arm.

Mr. Casaubon kept his hands behind him and allowed her pliant arm to
cling with difficulty against his rigid arm.

There was something horrible to Dorothea in the sensation which this
unresponsive hardness inflicted on her.  That is a strong word, but not
too strong: it is in these acts called trivialities that the seeds of
joy are forever wasted, until men and women look round with haggard
faces at the devastation their own waste has made, and say, the earth
bears no harvest of sweetness--calling their denial knowledge.  You may
ask why, in the name of manliness, Mr. Casaubon should have behaved in
that way.  Consider that his was a mind which shrank from pity: have
you ever watched in such a mind the effect of a suspicion that what is
pressing it as a grief may be really a source of contentment, either
actual or future, to the being who already offends by pitying?
Besides, he knew little of Dorothea's sensations, and had not reflected
that on such an occasion as the present they were comparable in
strength to his own sensibilities about Carp's criticisms.

Dorothea did not withdraw her arm, but she could not venture to speak.
Mr. Casaubon did not say, "I wish to be alone," but he directed his
steps in silence towards the house, and as they entered by the glass
door on this eastern side, Dorothea withdrew her arm and lingered on
the matting, that she might leave her husband quite free.  He entered
the library and shut himself in, alone with his sorrow.

She went up to her boudoir.  The open bow-window let in the serene
glory of the afternoon lying in the avenue, where the lime-trees cast
long shadows.  But Dorothea knew nothing of the scene.  She threw
herself on a chair, not heeding that she was in the dazzling sun-rays:
if there were discomfort in that, how could she tell that it was not
part of her inward misery?

She was in the reaction of a rebellious anger stronger than any she had
felt since her marriage.  Instead of tears there came words:--

"What have I done--what am I--that he should treat me so?  He never
knows what is in my mind--he never cares.  What is the use of anything
I do?  He wishes he had never married me."

She began to hear herself, and was checked into stillness.  Like one
who has lost his way and is weary, she sat and saw as in one glance all
the paths of her young hope which she should never find again.  And
just as clearly in the miserable light she saw her own and her
husband's solitude--how they walked apart so that she was obliged to
survey him.  If he had drawn her towards him, she would never have
surveyed him--never have said, "Is he worth living for?" but would have
felt him simply a part of her own life.  Now she said bitterly, "It is
his fault, not mine."  In the jar of her whole being, Pity was
overthrown.  Was it her fault that she had believed in him--had
believed in his worthiness?--And what, exactly, was he?--  She was able
enough to estimate him--she who waited on his glances with trembling,
and shut her best soul in prison, paying it only hidden visits, that
she might be petty enough to please him.  In such a crisis as this,
some women begin to hate.

The sun was low when Dorothea was thinking that she would not go down
again, but would send a message to her husband saying that she was not
well and preferred remaining up-stairs. She had never deliberately
allowed her resentment to govern her in this way before, but she
believed now that she could not see him again without telling him the
truth about her feeling, and she must wait till she could do it without
interruption.  He might wonder and be hurt at her message.  It was good
that he should wonder and be hurt.  Her anger said, as anger is apt to
say, that God was with her--that all heaven, though it were crowded
with spirits watching them, must be on her side.  She had determined to
ring her bell, when there came a rap at the door.

Mr. Casaubon had sent to say that he would have his dinner in the
library.  He wished to be quite alone this evening, being much occupied.

"I shall not dine, then, Tantripp."

"Oh, madam, let me bring you a little something?"

"No; I am not well.  Get everything ready in my dressing room, but pray
do not disturb me again."

Dorothea sat almost motionless in her meditative struggle, while the
evening slowly deepened into night.  But the struggle changed
continually, as that of a man who begins with a movement towards
striking and ends with conquering his desire to strike.  The energy
that would animate a crime is not more than is wanted to inspire a
resolved submission, when the noble habit of the soul reasserts itself.
That thought with which Dorothea had gone out to meet her husband--her
conviction that he had been asking about the possible arrest of all his
work, and that the answer must have wrung his heart, could not be long
without rising beside the image of him, like a shadowy monitor looking
at her anger with sad remonstrance.  It cost her a litany of pictured
sorrows and of silent cries that she might be the mercy for those
sorrows--but the resolved submission did come; and when the house was
still, and she knew that it was near the time when Mr. Casaubon
habitually went to rest, she opened her door gently and stood outside
in the darkness waiting for his coming up-stairs with a light in his
hand.  If he did not come soon she thought that she would go down and
even risk incurring another pang.  She would never again expect
anything else.  But she did hear the library door open, and slowly the
light advanced up the staircase without noise from the footsteps on the
carpet.  When her husband stood opposite to her, she saw that his face
was more haggard.  He started slightly on seeing her, and she looked up
at him beseechingly, without speaking.

"Dorothea!" he said, with a gentle surprise in his tone.  "Were you
waiting for me?"

"Yes, I did not like to disturb you."

"Come, my dear, come.  You are young, and need not to extend your life
by watching."

When the kind quiet melancholy of that speech fell on Dorothea's ears,
she felt something like the thankfulness that might well up in us if we
had narrowly escaped hurting a lamed creature.  She put her hand into
her husband's, and they went along the broad corridor together.





BOOK V.





THE DEAD HAND.



CHAPTER XLIII.

    This figure hath high price: 't was wrought with love
    Ages ago in finest ivory;
    Nought modish in it, pure and noble lines
    Of generous womanhood that fits all time
    That too is costly ware; majolica
    Of deft design, to please a lordly eye:
    The smile, you see, is perfect--wonderful
    As mere Faience! a table ornament
    To suit the richest mounting."


Dorothea seldom left home without her husband, but she did occasionally
drive into Middlemarch alone, on little errands of shopping or charity
such as occur to every lady of any wealth when she lives within three
miles of a town.  Two days after that scene in the Yew-tree Walk, she
determined to use such an opportunity in order if possible to see
Lydgate, and learn from him whether her husband had really felt any
depressing change of symptoms which he was concealing from her, and
whether he had insisted on knowing the utmost about himself.  She felt
almost guilty in asking for knowledge about him from another, but the
dread of being without it--the dread of that ignorance which would make
her unjust or hard--overcame every scruple.  That there had been some
crisis in her husband's mind she was certain: he had the very next day
begun a new method of arranging his notes, and had associated her quite
newly in carrying out his plan.  Poor Dorothea needed to lay up stores
of patience.

It was about four o'clock when she drove to Lydgate's house in Lowick
Gate, wishing, in her immediate doubt of finding him at home, that she
had written beforehand.  And he was not at home.

"Is Mrs. Lydgate at home?" said Dorothea, who had never, that she knew
of, seen Rosamond, but now remembered the fact of the marriage.  Yes,
Mrs. Lydgate was at home.

"I will go in and speak to her, if she will allow me.  Will you ask her
if she can see me--see Mrs. Casaubon, for a few minutes?"

When the servant had gone to deliver that message, Dorothea could hear
sounds of music through an open window--a few notes from a man's voice
and then a piano bursting into roulades.  But the roulades broke off
suddenly, and then the servant came back saying that Mrs. Lydgate would
be happy to see Mrs. Casaubon.

When the drawing-room door opened and Dorothea entered, there was a
sort of contrast not infrequent in country life when the habits of the
different ranks were less blent than now.  Let those who know, tell us
exactly what stuff it was that Dorothea wore in those days of mild
autumn--that thin white woollen stuff soft to the touch and soft to the
eye.  It always seemed to have been lately washed, and to smell of the
sweet hedges--was always in the shape of a pelisse with sleeves hanging
all out of the fashion.  Yet if she had entered before a still audience
as Imogene or Cato's daughter, the dress might have seemed right
enough: the grace and dignity were in her limbs and neck; and about her
simply parted hair and candid eyes the large round poke which was then
in the fate of women, seemed no more odd as a head-dress than the gold
trencher we call a halo.  By the present audience of two persons, no
dramatic heroine could have been expected with more interest than Mrs.
Casaubon.  To Rosamond she was one of those county divinities not
mixing with Middlemarch mortality, whose slightest marks of manner or
appearance were worthy of her study; moreover, Rosamond was not without
satisfaction that Mrs. Casaubon should have an opportunity of studying
_her_. What is the use of being exquisite if you are not seen by the
best judges? and since Rosamond had received the highest compliments at
Sir Godwin Lydgate's, she felt quite confident of the impression she
must make on people of good birth.  Dorothea put out her hand with her
usual simple kindness, and looked admiringly at Lydgate's lovely
bride--aware that there was a gentleman standing at a distance, but
seeing him merely as a coated figure at a wide angle.  The gentleman
was too much occupied with the presence of the one woman to reflect on
the contrast between the two--a contrast that would certainly have been
striking to a calm observer.  They were both tall, and their eyes were
on a level; but imagine Rosamond's infantine blondness and wondrous
crown of hair-plaits, with her pale-blue dress of a fit and fashion so
perfect that no dressmaker could look at it without emotion, a large
embroidered collar which it was to be hoped all beholders would know
the price of, her small hands duly set off with rings, and that
controlled self-consciousness of manner which is the expensive
substitute for simplicity.

"Thank you very much for allowing me to interrupt you," said Dorothea,
immediately.  "I am anxious to see Mr. Lydgate, if possible, before I
go home, and I hoped that you might possibly tell me where I could find
him, or even allow me to wait for him, if you expect him soon."

"He is at the New Hospital," said Rosamond; "I am not sure how soon he
will come home.  But I can send for him."

"Will you let me go and fetch him?" said Will Ladislaw, coming forward.
He had already taken up his hat before Dorothea entered.  She colored
with surprise, but put out her hand with a smile of unmistakable
pleasure, saying--

"I did not know it was you: I had no thought of seeing you here."

"May I go to the Hospital and tell Mr. Lydgate that you wish to see
him?" said Will.

"It would be quicker to send the carriage for him," said Dorothea, "if
you will be kind enough to give the message to the coachman."

Will was moving to the door when Dorothea, whose mind had flashed in an
instant over many connected memories, turned quickly and said, "I will
go myself, thank you.  I wish to lose no time before getting home
again.  I will drive to the Hospital and see Mr. Lydgate there.  Pray
excuse me, Mrs. Lydgate.  I am very much obliged to you."

Her mind was evidently arrested by some sudden thought, and she left
the room hardly conscious of what was immediately around her--hardly
conscious that Will opened the door for her and offered her his arm to
lead her to the carriage.  She took the arm but said nothing.  Will was
feeling rather vexed and miserable, and found nothing to say on his
side.  He handed her into the carriage in silence, they said good-by,
and Dorothea drove away.

In the five minutes' drive to the Hospital she had time for some
reflections that were quite new to her.  Her decision to go, and her
preoccupation in leaving the room, had come from the sudden sense that
there would be a sort of deception in her voluntarily allowing any
further intercourse between herself and Will which she was unable to
mention to her husband, and already her errand in seeking Lydgate was a
matter of concealment.  That was all that had been explicitly in her
mind; but she had been urged also by a vague discomfort.  Now that she
was alone in her drive, she heard the notes of the man's voice and the
accompanying piano, which she had not noted much at the time, returning
on her inward sense; and she found herself thinking with some wonder
that Will Ladislaw was passing his time with Mrs. Lydgate in her
husband's absence.  And then she could not help remembering that he had
passed some time with her under like circumstances, so why should there
be any unfitness in the fact?  But Will was Mr. Casaubon's relative,
and one towards whom she was bound to show kindness.  Still there had
been signs which perhaps she ought to have understood as implying that
Mr. Casaubon did not like his cousin's visits during his own absence.
"Perhaps I have been mistaken in many things," said poor Dorothea to
herself, while the tears came rolling and she had to dry them quickly.
She felt confusedly unhappy, and the image of Will which had been so
clear to her before was mysteriously spoiled.  But the carriage stopped
at the gate of the Hospital.  She was soon walking round the grass
plots with Lydgate, and her feelings recovered the strong bent which
had made her seek for this interview.

Will Ladislaw, meanwhile, was mortified, and knew the reason of it
clearly enough.  His chances of meeting Dorothea were rare; and here
for the first time there had come a chance which had set him at a
disadvantage.  It was not only, as it had been hitherto, that she was
not supremely occupied with him, but that she had seen him under
circumstances in which he might appear not to be supremely occupied
with her.  He felt thrust to a new distance from her, amongst the
circles of Middlemarchers who made no part of her life.  But that was
not his fault: of course, since he had taken his lodgings in the town,
he had been making as many acquaintances as he could, his position
requiring that he should know everybody and everything.  Lydgate was
really better worth knowing than any one else in the neighborhood, and
he happened to have a wife who was musical and altogether worth calling
upon.  Here was the whole history of the situation in which Diana had
descended too unexpectedly on her worshipper.  It was mortifying.  Will
was conscious that he should not have been at Middlemarch but for
Dorothea; and yet his position there was threatening to divide him from
her with those barriers of habitual sentiment which are more fatal to
the persistence of mutual interest than all the distance between Rome
and Britain.  Prejudices about rank and status were easy enough to defy
in the form of a tyrannical letter from Mr. Casaubon; but prejudices,
like odorous bodies, have a double existence both solid and subtle--solid
as the pyramids, subtle as the twentieth echo of an echo, or as
the memory of hyacinths which once scented the darkness.  And Will was
of a temperament to feel keenly the presence of subtleties: a man of
clumsier perceptions would not have felt, as he did, that for the first
time some sense of unfitness in perfect freedom with him had sprung up
in Dorothea's mind, and that their silence, as he conducted her to the
carriage, had had a chill in it.  Perhaps Casaubon, in his hatred and
jealousy, had been insisting to Dorothea that Will had slid below her
socially.  Confound Casaubon!

Will re-entered the drawing-room, took up his hat, and looking
irritated as he advanced towards Mrs. Lydgate, who had seated herself
at her work-table, said--

"It is always fatal to have music or poetry interrupted.  May I come
another day and just finish about the rendering of 'Lungi dal caro
bene'?"

"I shall be happy to be taught," said Rosamond.  "But I am sure you
admit that the interruption was a very beautiful one.  I quite envy
your acquaintance with Mrs. Casaubon.  Is she very clever?  She looks
as if she were."

"Really, I never thought about it," said Will, sulkily.

"That is just the answer Tertius gave me, when I first asked him if she
were handsome.  What is it that you gentlemen are thinking of when you
are with Mrs. Casaubon?"

"Herself," said Will, not indisposed to provoke the charming Mrs.
Lydgate.  "When one sees a perfect woman, one never thinks of her
attributes--one is conscious of her presence."

"I shall be jealous when Tertius goes to Lowick," said Rosamond,
dimpling, and speaking with aery lightness.  "He will come back and
think nothing of me."

"That does not seem to have been the effect on Lydgate hitherto.  Mrs.
Casaubon is too unlike other women for them to be compared with her."

"You are a devout worshipper, I perceive.  You often see her, I
suppose."

"No," said Will, almost pettishly.  "Worship is usually a matter of
theory rather than of practice.  But I am practising it to excess just
at this moment--I must really tear myself away."

"Pray come again some evening: Mr. Lydgate will like to hear the music,
and I cannot enjoy it so well without him."

When her husband was at home again, Rosamond said, standing in front of
him and holding his coat-collar with both her hands, "Mr. Ladislaw was
here singing with me when Mrs. Casaubon came in.  He seemed vexed.  Do
you think he disliked her seeing him at our house?  Surely your
position is more than equal to his--whatever may be his relation to the
Casaubons."

"No, no; it must be something else if he were really vexed, Ladislaw is
a sort of gypsy; he thinks nothing of leather and prunella."

"Music apart, he is not always very agreeable.  Do you like him?"

"Yes: I think he is a good fellow: rather miscellaneous and
bric-a-brac, but likable."

"Do you know, I think he adores Mrs. Casaubon."

"Poor devil!" said Lydgate, smiling and pinching his wife's ears.

Rosamond felt herself beginning to know a great deal of the world,
especially in discovering what when she was in her unmarried girlhood
had been inconceivable to her except as a dim tragedy in by-gone
costumes--that women, even after marriage, might make conquests and
enslave men.  At that time young ladies in the country, even when
educated at Mrs. Lemon's, read little French literature later than
Racine, and public prints had not cast their present magnificent
illumination over the scandals of life.  Still, vanity, with a woman's
whole mind and day to work in, can construct abundantly on slight
hints, especially on such a hint as the possibility of indefinite
conquests.  How delightful to make captives from the throne of marriage
with a husband as crown-prince by your side--himself in fact a
subject--while the captives look up forever hopeless, losing their
rest probably, and if their appetite too, so much the better!  But
Rosamond's romance turned at present chiefly on her crown-prince, and
it was enough to enjoy his assured subjection.  When he said, "Poor
devil!" she asked, with playful curiosity--

"Why so?"

"Why, what can a man do when he takes to adoring one of you mermaids?
He only neglects his work and runs up bills."

"I am sure you do not neglect your work.  You are always at the
Hospital, or seeing poor patients, or thinking about some doctor's
quarrel; and then at home you always want to pore over your microscope
and phials.  Confess you like those things better than me."

"Haven't you ambition enough to wish that your husband should be
something better than a Middlemarch doctor?" said Lydgate, letting his
hands fall on to his wife's shoulders, and looking at her with
affectionate gravity.  "I shall make you learn my favorite bit from an
old poet--

        'Why should our pride make such a stir to be
         And be forgot?  What good is like to this,
         To do worthy the writing, and to write
         Worthy the reading and the worlds delight?'

What I want, Rosy, is to do worthy the writing,--and to write out
myself what I have done.  A man must work, to do that, my pet."

"Of course, I wish you to make discoveries: no one could more wish you
to attain a high position in some better place than Middlemarch.  You
cannot say that I have ever tried to hinder you from working.  But we
cannot live like hermits.  You are not discontented with me, Tertius?"

"No, dear, no.  I am too entirely contented."

"But what did Mrs. Casaubon want to say to you?"

"Merely to ask about her husband's health.  But I think she is going to
be splendid to our New Hospital: I think she will give us two hundred
a-year."



CHAPTER XLIV.

    I would not creep along the coast but steer
    Out in mid-sea, by guidance of the stars.


When Dorothea, walking round the laurel-planted plots of the New
Hospital with Lydgate, had learned from him that there were no signs of
change in Mr. Casaubon's bodily condition beyond the mental sign of
anxiety to know the truth about his illness, she was silent for a few
moments, wondering whether she had said or done anything to rouse this
new anxiety.  Lydgate, not willing to let slip an opportunity of
furthering a favorite purpose, ventured to say--

"I don't know whether your or Mr.--Casaubon's attention has been drawn
to the needs of our New Hospital.  Circumstances have made it seem
rather egotistic in me to urge the subject; but that is not my fault:
it is because there is a fight being made against it by the other
medical men.  I think you are generally interested in such things, for
I remember that when I first had the pleasure of seeing you at Tipton
Grange before your marriage, you were asking me some questions about
the way in which the health of the poor was affected by their miserable
housing."

"Yes, indeed," said Dorothea, brightening.  "I shall be quite grateful
to you if you will tell me how I can help to make things a little
better.  Everything of that sort has slipped away from me since I have
been married.  I mean," she said, after a moment's hesitation, "that
the people in our village are tolerably comfortable, and my mind has
been too much taken up for me to inquire further.  But here--in such a
place as Middlemarch--there must be a great deal to be done."

"There is everything to be done," said Lydgate, with abrupt energy.
"And this Hospital is a capital piece of work, due entirely to Mr.
Bulstrode's exertions, and in a great degree to his money.  But one man
can't do everything in a scheme of this sort.  Of course he looked
forward to help.  And now there's a mean, petty feud set up against the
thing in the town, by certain persons who want to make it a failure."

"What can be their reasons?" said Dorothea, with naive surprise.

"Chiefly Mr. Bulstrode's unpopularity, to begin with.  Half the town
would almost take trouble for the sake of thwarting him.  In this
stupid world most people never consider that a thing is good to be done
unless it is done by their own set.  I had no connection with Bulstrode
before I came here.  I look at him quite impartially, and I see that he
has some notions--that he has set things on foot--which I can turn to
good public purpose.  If a fair number of the better educated men went
to work with the belief that their observations might contribute to the
reform of medical doctrine and practice, we should soon see a change
for the better.  That's my point of view.  I hold that by refusing to
work with Mr. Bulstrode I should be turning my back on an opportunity
of making my profession more generally serviceable."

"I quite agree with you," said Dorothea, at once fascinated by the
situation sketched in Lydgate's words.  "But what is there against Mr.
Bulstrode?  I know that my uncle is friendly with him."

"People don't like his religious tone," said Lydgate, breaking off
there.

"That is all the stronger reason for despising such an opposition,"
said Dorothea, looking at the affairs of Middlemarch by the light of
the great persecutions.

"To put the matter quite fairly, they have other objections to him:--he
is masterful and rather unsociable, and he is concerned with trade,
which has complaints of its own that I know nothing about.  But what
has that to do with the question whether it would not be a fine thing
to establish here a more valuable hospital than any they have in the
county?  The immediate motive to the opposition, however, is the fact
that Bulstrode has put the medical direction into my hands.  Of course
I am glad of that.  It gives me an opportunity of doing some good
work,--and I am aware that I have to justify his choice of me.  But the
consequence is, that the whole profession in Middlemarch have set
themselves tooth and nail against the Hospital, and not only refuse to
cooperate themselves, but try to blacken the whole affair and hinder
subscriptions."

"How very petty!" exclaimed Dorothea, indignantly.

"I suppose one must expect to fight one's way: there is hardly anything
to be done without it.  And the ignorance of people about here is
stupendous.  I don't lay claim to anything else than having used some
opportunities which have not come within everybody's reach; but there
is no stifling the offence of being young, and a new-comer, and
happening to know something more than the old inhabitants.  Still, if I
believe that I can set going a better method of treatment--if I
believe that I can pursue certain observations and inquiries which may
be a lasting benefit to medical practice, I should be a base truckler
if I allowed any consideration of personal comfort to hinder me.  And
the course is all the clearer from there being no salary in question to
put my persistence in an equivocal light."

"I am glad you have told me this, Mr. Lydgate," said Dorothea,
cordially.  "I feel sure I can help a little.  I have some money, and
don't know what to do with it--that is often an uncomfortable thought
to me.  I am sure I can spare two hundred a-year for a grand purpose
like this.  How happy you must be, to know things that you feel sure
will do great good!  I wish I could awake with that knowledge every
morning.  There seems to be so much trouble taken that one can hardly
see the good of!"

There was a melancholy cadence in Dorothea's voice as she spoke these
last words.  But she presently added, more cheerfully, "Pray come to
Lowick and tell us more of this.  I will mention the subject to Mr.
Casaubon.  I must hasten home now."

She did mention it that evening, and said that she should like to
subscribe two hundred a-year--she had seven hundred a-year as the
equivalent of her own fortune, settled on her at her marriage.  Mr.
Casaubon made no objection beyond a passing remark that the sum might
be disproportionate in relation to other good objects, but when
Dorothea in her ignorance resisted that suggestion, he acquiesced.  He
did not care himself about spending money, and was not reluctant to
give it.  If he ever felt keenly any question of money it was through
the medium of another passion than the love of material property.

Dorothea told him that she had seen Lydgate, and recited the gist of
her conversation with him about the Hospital.  Mr. Casaubon did not
question her further, but he felt sure that she had wished to know what
had passed between Lydgate and himself "She knows that I know," said
the ever-restless voice within; but that increase of tacit knowledge
only thrust further off any confidence between them.  He distrusted her
affection; and what loneliness is more lonely than distrust?



CHAPTER XLV.

    It is the humor of many heads to extol the days of their
    forefathers, and declaim against the wickedness of times
    present. Which notwithstanding they cannot handsomely do,
    without the borrowed help and satire of times past;
    condemning the vices of their own times, by the expressions
    of vices in times which they commend, which cannot but argue
    the community of vice in both. Horace, therefore, Juvenal,
    and Persius, were no prophets, although their lines did seem
    to indigitate and point at our times.--SIR THOMAS BROWNE:
    Pseudodoxia Epidemica.


That opposition to the New Fever Hospital which Lydgate had sketched to
Dorothea was, like other oppositions, to be viewed in many different
lights.  He regarded it as a mixture of jealousy and dunderheaded
prejudice.  Mr. Bulstrode saw in it not only medical jealousy but a
determination to thwart himself, prompted mainly by a hatred of that
vital religion of which he had striven to be an effectual lay
representative--a hatred which certainly found pretexts apart from
religion such as were only too easy to find in the entanglements of
human action.  These might be called the ministerial views.  But
oppositions have the illimitable range of objections at command, which
need never stop short at the boundary of knowledge, but can draw
forever on the vasts of ignorance.  What the opposition in Middlemarch
said about the New Hospital and its administration had certainly a
great deal of echo in it, for heaven has taken care that everybody
shall not be an originator; but there were differences which
represented every social shade between the polished moderation of Dr.
Minchin and the trenchant assertion of Mrs. Dollop, the landlady of the
Tankard in Slaughter Lane.

Mrs. Dollop became more and more convinced by her own asseveration,
that Dr. Lydgate meant to let the people die in the Hospital, if not to
poison them, for the sake of cutting them up without saying by your
leave or with your leave; for it was a known "fac" that he had wanted
to cut up Mrs. Goby, as respectable a woman as any in Parley Street,
who had money in trust before her marriage--a poor tale for a doctor,
who if he was good for anything should know what was the matter with
you before you died, and not want to pry into your inside after you
were gone.  If that was not reason, Mrs. Dollop wished to know what
was; but there was a prevalent feeling in her audience that her opinion
was a bulwark, and that if it were overthrown there would be no limits
to the cutting-up of bodies, as had been well seen in Burke and Hare
with their pitch-plaisters--such a hanging business as that was not
wanted in Middlemarch!

And let it not be supposed that opinion at the Tankard in Slaughter
Lane was unimportant to the medical profession: that old authentic
public-house--the original Tankard, known by the name of Dollop's--was
the resort of a great Benefit Club, which had some months before put to
the vote whether its long-standing medical man, "Doctor Gambit," should
not be cashiered in favor of "this Doctor Lydgate," who was capable of
performing the most astonishing cures, and rescuing people altogether
given up by other practitioners.  But the balance had been turned
against Lydgate by two members, who for some private reasons held that
this power of resuscitating persons as good as dead was an equivocal
recommendation, and might interfere with providential favors.  In the
course of the year, however, there had been a change in the public
sentiment, of which the unanimity at Dollop's was an index.

A good deal more than a year ago, before anything was known of
Lydgate's skill, the judgments on it had naturally been divided,
depending on a sense of likelihood, situated perhaps in the pit of the
stomach or in the pineal gland, and differing in its verdicts, but not
the less valuable as a guide in the total deficit of evidence.
Patients who had chronic diseases or whose lives had long been worn
threadbare, like old Featherstone's, had been at once inclined to try
him; also, many who did not like paying their doctor's bills, thought
agreeably of opening an account with a new doctor and sending for him
without stint if the children's temper wanted a dose, occasions when
the old practitioners were often crusty; and all persons thus inclined
to employ Lydgate held it likely that he was clever.  Some considered
that he might do more than others "where there was liver;"--at least
there would be no harm in getting a few bottles of "stuff" from him,
since if these proved useless it would still be possible to return to
the Purifying Pills, which kept you alive if they did not remove the
yellowness.  But these were people of minor importance.  Good
Middlemarch families were of course not going to change their doctor
without reason shown; and everybody who had employed Mr. Peacock did
not feel obliged to accept a new man merely in the character of his
successor, objecting that he was "not likely to be equal to Peacock."

But Lydgate had not been long in the town before there were particulars
enough reported of him to breed much more specific expectations and to
intensify differences into partisanship; some of the particulars being
of that impressive order of which the significance is entirely hidden,
like a statistical amount without a standard of comparison, but with a
note of exclamation at the end.  The cubic feet of oxygen yearly
swallowed by a full-grown man--what a shudder they might have created
in some Middlemarch circles!  "Oxygen! nobody knows what that may
be--is it any wonder the cholera has got to Dantzic?  And yet there are
people who say quarantine is no good!"

One of the facts quickly rumored was that Lydgate did not dispense
drugs.  This was offensive both to the physicians whose exclusive
distinction seemed infringed on, and to the surgeon-apothecaries with
whom he ranged himself; and only a little while before, they might have
counted on having the law on their side against a man who without
calling himself a London-made M.D. dared to ask for pay except as a
charge on drugs.  But Lydgate had not been experienced enough to
foresee that his new course would be even more offensive to the laity;
and to Mr. Mawmsey, an important grocer in the Top Market, who, though
not one of his patients, questioned him in an affable manner on the
subject, he was injudicious enough to give a hasty popular explanation
of his reasons, pointing out to Mr. Mawmsey that it must lower the
character of practitioners, and be a constant injury to the public, if
their only mode of getting paid for their work was by their making out
long bills for draughts, boluses, and mixtures.

"It is in that way that hard-working medical men may come to be almost
as mischievous as quacks," said Lydgate, rather thoughtlessly.  "To get
their own bread they must overdose the king's lieges; and that's a bad
sort of treason, Mr. Mawmsey--undermines the constitution in a fatal
way."

Mr. Mawmsey was not only an overseer (it was about a question of
outdoor pay that he was having an interview with Lydgate), he was also
asthmatic and had an increasing family: thus, from a medical point of
view, as well as from his own, he was an important man; indeed, an
exceptional grocer, whose hair was arranged in a flame-like pyramid,
and whose retail deference was of the cordial, encouraging
kind--jocosely complimentary, and with a certain considerate abstinence
from letting out the full force of his mind.  It was Mr. Mawmsey's
friendly jocoseness in questioning him which had set the tone of
Lydgate's reply.  But let the wise be warned against too great
readiness at explanation: it multiplies the sources of mistake,
lengthening the sum for reckoners sure to go wrong.

Lydgate smiled as he ended his speech, putting his foot into the
stirrup, and Mr. Mawmsey laughed more than he would have done if he had
known who the king's lieges were, giving his "Good morning, sir,
good-morning, sir," with the air of one who saw everything clearly
enough.  But in truth his views were perturbed.  For years he had been
paying bills with strictly made items, so that for every half-crown and
eighteen-pence he was certain something measurable had been delivered.
He had done this with satisfaction, including it among his
responsibilities as a husband and father, and regarding a longer bill
than usual as a dignity worth mentioning.  Moreover, in addition to the
massive benefit of the drugs to "self and family," he had enjoyed the
pleasure of forming an acute judgment as to their immediate effects, so
as to give an intelligent statement for the guidance of Mr. Gambit--a
practitioner just a little lower in status than Wrench or Toller, and
especially esteemed as an accoucheur, of whose ability Mr. Mawmsey had
the poorest opinion on all other points, but in doctoring, he was wont
to say in an undertone, he placed Gambit above any of them.

Here were deeper reasons than the superficial talk of a new man, which
appeared still flimsier in the drawing-room over the shop, when they
were recited to Mrs. Mawmsey, a woman accustomed to be made much of as
a fertile mother,--generally under attendance more or less frequent
from Mr. Gambit, and occasionally having attacks which required Dr.
Minchin.

"Does this Mr. Lydgate mean to say there is no use in taking medicine?"
said Mrs. Mawmsey, who was slightly given to drawling.  "I should like
him to tell me how I could bear up at Fair time, if I didn't take
strengthening medicine for a month beforehand.  Think of what I have to
provide for calling customers, my dear!"--here Mrs. Mawmsey turned to
an intimate female friend who sat by--"a large veal pie--a stuffed
fillet--a round of beef--ham, tongue, et cetera, et cetera!  But what
keeps me up best is the pink mixture, not the brown.  I wonder, Mr.
Mawmsey, with _your_ experience, you could have patience to listen.  I
should have told him at once that I knew a little better than that."

"No, no, no," said Mr. Mawmsey; "I was not going to tell him my
opinion.  Hear everything and judge for yourself is my motto.  But he
didn't know who he was talking to.  I was not to be turned on _his_
finger.  People often pretend to tell me things, when they might as
well say, 'Mawmsey, you're a fool.'  But I smile at it: I humor
everybody's weak place.  If physic had done harm to self and family, I
should have found it out by this time."

The next day Mr. Gambit was told that Lydgate went about saying physic
was of no use.

"Indeed!" said he, lifting his eyebrows with cautious surprise.  (He
was a stout husky man with a large ring on his fourth finger.) "How
will he cure his patients, then?"

"That is what I say," returned Mrs. Mawmsey, who habitually gave weight
to her speech by loading her pronouns.  "Does _he_ suppose that people
will pay him only to come and sit with them and go away again?"

Mrs. Mawmsey had had a great deal of sitting from Mr. Gambit, including
very full accounts of his own habits of body and other affairs; but of
course he knew there was no innuendo in her remark, since his spare
time and personal narrative had never been charged for.  So he replied,
humorously--

"Well, Lydgate is a good-looking young fellow, you know."

"Not one that I would employ," said Mrs. Mawmsey.  "_Others_ may do as
they please."

Hence Mr. Gambit could go away from the chief grocer's without fear of
rivalry, but not without a sense that Lydgate was one of those
hypocrites who try to discredit others by advertising their own
honesty, and that it might be worth some people's while to show him up.
Mr. Gambit, however, had a satisfactory practice, much pervaded by the
smells of retail trading which suggested the reduction of cash payments
to a balance.  And he did not think it worth his while to show Lydgate
up until he knew how.  He had not indeed great resources of education,
and had had to work his own way against a good deal of professional
contempt; but he made none the worse accoucheur for calling the
breathing apparatus "longs."

Other medical men felt themselves more capable.  Mr. Toller shared the
highest practice in the town and belonged to an old Middlemarch family:
there were Tollers in the law and everything else above the line of
retail trade.  Unlike our irascible friend Wrench, he had the easiest
way in the world of taking things which might be supposed to annoy him,
being a well-bred, quietly facetious man, who kept a good house, was
very fond of a little sporting when he could get it, very friendly with
Mr. Hawley, and hostile to Mr. Bulstrode.  It may seem odd that with
such pleasant habits he should have been given to the heroic treatment,
bleeding and blistering and starving his patients, with a dispassionate
disregard to his personal example; but the incongruity favored the
opinion of his ability among his patients, who commonly observed that
Mr. Toller had lazy manners, but his treatment was as active as you
could desire: no man, said they, carried more seriousness into his
profession: he was a little slow in coming, but when he came, he _did_
something.  He was a great favorite in his own circle, and whatever he
implied to any one's disadvantage told doubly from his careless
ironical tone.

He naturally got tired of smiling and saying, "Ah!" when he was told
that Mr. Peacock's successor did not mean to dispense medicines; and
Mr. Hackbutt one day mentioning it over the wine at a dinner-party, Mr.
Toller said, laughingly, "Dibbitts will get rid of his stale drugs,
then.  I'm fond of little Dibbitts--I'm glad he's in luck."

"I see your meaning, Toller," said Mr. Hackbutt, "and I am entirely of
your opinion.  I shall take an opportunity of expressing myself to that
effect.  A medical man should be responsible for the quality of the
drugs consumed by his patients.  That is the rationale of the system of
charging which has hitherto obtained; and nothing is more offensive
than this ostentation of reform, where there is no real amelioration."

"Ostentation, Hackbutt?" said Mr. Toller, ironically.  "I don't see
that.  A man can't very well be ostentatious of what nobody believes
in.  There's no reform in the matter: the question is, whether the
profit on the drugs is paid to the medical man by the druggist or by
the patient, and whether there shall be extra pay under the name of
attendance."

"Ah, to be sure; one of your damned new versions of old humbug," said
Mr. Hawley, passing the decanter to Mr. Wrench.

Mr. Wrench, generally abstemious, often drank wine rather freely at a
party, getting the more irritable in consequence.

"As to humbug, Hawley," he said, "that's a word easy to fling about.
But what I contend against is the way medical men are fouling their own
nest, and setting up a cry about the country as if a general
practitioner who dispenses drugs couldn't be a gentleman.  I throw back
the imputation with scorn.  I say, the most ungentlemanly trick a man
can be guilty of is to come among the members of his profession with
innovations which are a libel on their time-honored procedure.  That is
my opinion, and I am ready to maintain it against any one who
contradicts me."  Mr. Wrench's voice had become exceedingly sharp.

"I can't oblige you there, Wrench," said Mr. Hawley, thrusting his
hands into his trouser-pockets.

"My dear fellow," said Mr. Toller, striking in pacifically, and looking
at Mr. Wrench, "the physicians have their toes trodden on more than we
have.  If you come to dignity it is a question for Minchin and Sprague."

"Does medical jurisprudence provide nothing against these
infringements?" said Mr. Hackbutt, with a disinterested desire to offer
his lights.  "How does the law stand, eh, Hawley?"

"Nothing to be done there," said Mr. Hawley.  "I looked into it for
Sprague.  You'd only break your nose against a damned judge's decision."

"Pooh! no need of law," said Mr. Toller.  "So far as practice is
concerned the attempt is an absurdity.  No patient will like
it--certainly not Peacock's, who have been used to depletion.  Pass the
wine."

Mr. Toller's prediction was partly verified.  If Mr. and Mrs. Mawmsey,
who had no idea of employing Lydgate, were made uneasy by his supposed
declaration against drugs, it was inevitable that those who called him
in should watch a little anxiously to see whether he did "use all the
means he might use" in the case.  Even good Mr. Powderell, who in his
constant charity of interpretation was inclined to esteem Lydgate the
more for what seemed a conscientious pursuit of a better plan, had his
mind disturbed with doubts during his wife's attack of erysipelas, and
could not abstain from mentioning to Lydgate that Mr. Peacock on a
similar occasion had administered a series of boluses which were not
otherwise definable than by their remarkable effect in bringing Mrs.
Powderell round before Michaelmas from an illness which had begun in a
remarkably hot August.  At last, indeed, in the conflict between his
desire not to hurt Lydgate and his anxiety that no "means" should be
lacking, he induced his wife privately to take Widgeon's Purifying
Pills, an esteemed Middlemarch medicine, which arrested every disease
at the fountain by setting to work at once upon the blood.  This
co-operative measure was not to be mentioned to Lydgate, and Mr.
Powderell himself had no certain reliance on it, only hoping that it
might be attended with a blessing.

But in this doubtful stage of Lydgate's introduction he was helped by
what we mortals rashly call good fortune.  I suppose no doctor ever
came newly to a place without making cures that surprised somebody--cures
which may be called fortune's testimonials, and deserve as much
credit as the written or printed kind.  Various patients got well while
Lydgate was attending them, some even of dangerous illnesses; and it
was remarked that the new doctor with his new ways had at least the
merit of bringing people back from the brink of death.  The trash
talked on such occasions was the more vexatious to Lydgate, because it
gave precisely the sort of prestige which an incompetent and
unscrupulous man would desire, and was sure to be imputed to him by the
simmering dislike of the other medical men as an encouragement on his
own part of ignorant puffing.  But even his proud outspokenness was
checked by the discernment that it was as useless to fight against the
interpretations of ignorance as to whip the fog; and "good fortune"
insisted on using those interpretations.

Mrs. Larcher having just become charitably concerned about alarming
symptoms in her charwoman, when Dr. Minchin called, asked him to see
her then and there, and to give her a certificate for the Infirmary;
whereupon after examination he wrote a statement of the case as one of
tumor, and recommended the bearer Nancy Nash as an out-patient. Nancy,
calling at home on her way to the Infirmary, allowed the stay maker and
his wife, in whose attic she lodged, to read Dr. Minchin's paper, and
by this means became a subject of compassionate conversation in the
neighboring shops of Churchyard Lane as being afflicted with a tumor at
first declared to be as large and hard as a duck's egg, but later in
the day to be about the size of "your fist." Most hearers agreed that
it would have to be cut out, but one had known of oil and another of
"squitchineal" as adequate to soften and reduce any lump in the body
when taken enough of into the inside--the oil by gradually "soopling,"
the squitchineal by eating away.

Meanwhile when Nancy presented herself at the Infirmary, it happened to
be one of Lydgate's days there.  After questioning and examining her,
Lydgate said to the house-surgeon in an undertone, "It's not tumor:
it's cramp."  He ordered her a blister and some steel mixture, and told
her to go home and rest, giving her at the same time a note to Mrs.
Larcher, who, she said, was her best employer, to testify that she was
in need of good food.

But by-and-by Nancy, in her attic, became portentously worse, the
supposed tumor having indeed given way to the blister, but only
wandered to another region with angrier pain.  The staymaker's wife
went to fetch Lydgate, and he continued for a fortnight to attend Nancy
in her own home, until under his treatment she got quite well and went
to work again.  But the case continued to be described as one of tumor
in Churchyard Lane and other streets--nay, by Mrs. Larcher also; for
when Lydgate's remarkable cure was mentioned to Dr. Minchin, he
naturally did not like to say, "The case was not one of tumor, and I
was mistaken in describing it as such," but answered, "Indeed! ah!  I
saw it was a surgical case, not of a fatal kind." He had been inwardly
annoyed, however, when he had asked at the Infirmary about the woman he
had recommended two days before, to hear from the house-surgeon, a
youngster who was not sorry to vex Minchin with impunity, exactly what
had occurred: he privately pronounced that it was indecent in a general
practitioner to contradict a physician's diagnosis in that open manner,
and afterwards agreed with Wrench that Lydgate was disagreeably
inattentive to etiquette.  Lydgate did not make the affair a ground for
valuing himself or (very particularly) despising Minchin, such
rectification of misjudgments often happening among men of equal
qualifications.  But report took up this amazing case of tumor, not
clearly distinguished from cancer, and considered the more awful for
being of the wandering sort; till much prejudice against Lydgate's
method as to drugs was overcome by the proof of his marvellous skill in
the speedy restoration of Nancy Nash after she had been rolling and
rolling in agonies from the presence of a tumor both hard and
obstinate, but nevertheless compelled to yield.

How could Lydgate help himself?  It is offensive to tell a lady when
she is expressing her amazement at your skill, that she is altogether
mistaken and rather foolish in her amazement.  And to have entered into
the nature of diseases would only have added to his breaches of medical
propriety.  Thus he had to wince under a promise of success given by
that ignorant praise which misses every valid quality.

In the case of a more conspicuous patient, Mr. Borthrop Trumbull,
Lydgate was conscious of having shown himself something better than an
every-day doctor, though here too it was an equivocal advantage that he
won.  The eloquent auctioneer was seized with pneumonia, and having
been a patient of Mr. Peacock's, sent for Lydgate, whom he had
expressed his intention to patronize.  Mr Trumbull was a robust man, a
good subject for trying the expectant theory upon--watching the course
of an interesting disease when left as much as possible to itself, so
that the stages might be noted for future guidance; and from the air
with which he described his sensations Lydgate surmised that he would
like to be taken into his medical man's confidence, and be represented
as a partner in his own cure.  The auctioneer heard, without much
surprise, that his was a constitution which (always with due watching)
might be left to itself, so as to offer a beautiful example of a
disease with all its phases seen in clear delineation, and that he
probably had the rare strength of mind voluntarily to become the test
of a rational procedure, and thus make the disorder of his pulmonary
functions a general benefit to society.

Mr. Trumbull acquiesced at once, and entered strongly into the view
that an illness of his was no ordinary occasion for medical science.

"Never fear, sir; you are not speaking to one who is altogether
ignorant of the vis medicatrix," said he, with his usual superiority of
expression, made rather pathetic by difficulty of breathing.  And he
went without shrinking through his abstinence from drugs, much
sustained by application of the thermometer which implied the
importance of his temperature, by the sense that he furnished objects
for the microscope, and by learning many new words which seemed suited
to the dignity of his secretions.  For Lydgate was acute enough to
indulge him with a little technical talk.

It may be imagined that Mr. Trumbull rose from his couch with a
disposition to speak of an illness in which he had manifested the
strength of his mind as well as constitution; and he was not backward
in awarding credit to the medical man who had discerned the quality of
patient he had to deal with.  The auctioneer was not an ungenerous man,
and liked to give others their due, feeling that he could afford it.
He had caught the words "expectant method," and rang chimes on this and
other learned phrases to accompany the assurance that Lydgate "knew a
thing or two more than the rest of the doctors--was far better versed
in the secrets of his profession than the majority of his compeers."

This had happened before the affair of Fred Vincy's illness had given
to Mr. Wrench's enmity towards Lydgate more definite personal ground.
The new-comer already threatened to be a nuisance in the shape of
rivalry, and was certainly a nuisance in the shape of practical
criticism or reflections on his hard-driven elders, who had had
something else to do than to busy themselves with untried notions.  His
practice had spread in one or two quarters, and from the first the
report of his high family had led to his being pretty generally
invited, so that the other medical men had to meet him at dinner in the
best houses; and having to meet a man whom you dislike is not observed
always to end in a mutual attachment.  There was hardly ever so much
unanimity among them as in the opinion that Lydgate was an arrogant
young fellow, and yet ready for the sake of ultimately predominating to
show a crawling subservience to Bulstrode.  That Mr. Farebrother, whose
name was a chief flag of the anti-Bulstrode party, always defended
Lydgate and made a friend of him, was referred to Farebrother's
unaccountable way of fighting on both sides.

Here was plenty of preparation for the outburst of professional disgust
at the announcement of the laws Mr. Bulstrode was laying down for the
direction of the New Hospital, which were the more exasperating because
there was no present possibility of interfering with his will and
pleasure, everybody except Lord Medlicote having refused help towards
the building, on the ground that they preferred giving to the Old
Infirmary.  Mr. Bulstrode met all the expenses, and had ceased to be
sorry that he was purchasing the right to carry out his notions of
improvement without hindrance from prejudiced coadjutors; but he had
had to spend large sums, and the building had lingered.  Caleb Garth
had undertaken it, had failed during its progress, and before the
interior fittings were begun had retired from the management of the
business; and when referring to the Hospital he often said that however
Bulstrode might ring if you tried him, he liked good solid carpentry
and masonry, and had a notion both of drains and chimneys.  In fact,
the Hospital had become an object of intense interest to Bulstrode, and
he would willingly have continued to spare a large yearly sum that he
might rule it dictatorially without any Board; but he had another
favorite object which also required money for its accomplishment: he
wished to buy some land in the neighborhood of Middlemarch, and
therefore he wished to get considerable contributions towards
maintaining the Hospital.  Meanwhile he framed his plan of management.
The Hospital was to be reserved for fever in all its forms; Lydgate was
to be chief medical superintendent, that he might have free authority
to pursue all comparative investigations which his studies,
particularly in Paris, had shown him the importance of, the other
medical visitors having a consultative influence, but no power to
contravene Lydgate's ultimate decisions; and the general management was
to be lodged exclusively in the hands of five directors associated with
Mr. Bulstrode, who were to have votes in the ratio of their
contributions, the Board itself filling up any vacancy in its numbers,
and no mob of small contributors being admitted to a share of
government.

There was an immediate refusal on the part of every medical man in the
town to become a visitor at the Fever Hospital.

"Very well," said Lydgate to Mr. Bulstrode, "we have a capital
house-surgeon and dispenser, a clear-headed, neat-handed fellow; we'll
get Webbe from Crabsley, as good a country practitioner as any of them,
to come over twice a-week, and in case of any exceptional operation,
Protheroe will come from Brassing.  I must work the harder, that's all,
and I have given up my post at the Infirmary.  The plan will flourish
in spite of them, and then they'll be glad to come in.  Things can't
last as they are: there must be all sorts of reform soon, and then
young fellows may be glad to come and study here."  Lydgate was in high
spirits.

"I shall not flinch, you may depend upon it, Mr. Lydgate," said Mr.
Bulstrode.  "While I see you carrying out high intentions with vigor,
you shall have my unfailing support.  And I have humble confidence that
the blessing which has hitherto attended my efforts against the spirit
of evil in this town will not be withdrawn.  Suitable directors to
assist me I have no doubt of securing.  Mr. Brooke of Tipton has
already given me his concurrence, and a pledge to contribute yearly: he
has not specified the sum--probably not a great one.  But he will be a
useful member of the board."

A useful member was perhaps to be defined as one who would originate
nothing, and always vote with Mr. Bulstrode.

The medical aversion to Lydgate was hardly disguised now.  Neither Dr.
Sprague nor Dr. Minchin said that he disliked Lydgate's knowledge, or
his disposition to improve treatment: what they disliked was his
arrogance, which nobody felt to be altogether deniable.  They implied
that he was insolent, pretentious, and given to that reckless
innovation for the sake of noise and show which was the essence of the
charlatan.

The word charlatan once thrown on the air could not be let drop.  In
those days the world was agitated about the wondrous doings of Mr. St.
John Long, "noblemen and gentlemen" attesting his extraction of a fluid
like mercury from the temples of a patient.

Mr. Toller remarked one day, smilingly, to Mrs. Taft, that "Bulstrode
had found a man to suit him in Lydgate; a charlatan in religion is sure
to like other sorts of charlatans."

"Yes, indeed, I can imagine," said Mrs. Taft, keeping the number of
thirty stitches carefully in her mind all the while; "there are so many
of that sort.  I remember Mr. Cheshire, with his irons, trying to make
people straight when the Almighty had made them crooked."

"No, no," said Mr. Toller, "Cheshire was all right--all fair and above
board.  But there's St. John Long--that's the kind of fellow we call a
charlatan, advertising cures in ways nobody knows anything about: a
fellow who wants to make a noise by pretending to go deeper than other
people.  The other day he was pretending to tap a man's brain and get
quicksilver out of it."

"Good gracious! what dreadful trifling with people's constitutions!"
said Mrs. Taft.

After this, it came to be held in various quarters that Lydgate played
even with respectable constitutions for his own purposes, and how much
more likely that in his flighty experimenting he should make sixes and
sevens of hospital patients.  Especially it was to be expected, as the
landlady of the Tankard had said, that he would recklessly cut up their
dead bodies.  For Lydgate having attended Mrs. Goby, who died
apparently of a heart-disease not very clearly expressed in the
symptoms, too daringly asked leave of her relatives to open the body,
and thus gave an offence quickly spreading beyond Parley Street, where
that lady had long resided on an income such as made this association
of her body with the victims of Burke and Hare a flagrant insult to her
memory.

Affairs were in this stage when Lydgate opened the subject of the
Hospital to Dorothea.  We see that he was bearing enmity and silly
misconception with much spirit, aware that they were partly created by
his good share of success.

"They will not drive me away," he said, talking confidentially in Mr.
Farebrother's study.  "I have got a good opportunity here, for the ends
I care most about; and I am pretty sure to get income enough for our
wants.  By-and-by I shall go on as quietly as possible: I have no
seductions now away from home and work.  And I am more and more
convinced that it will be possible to demonstrate the homogeneous
origin of all the tissues.  Raspail and others are on the same track,
and I have been losing time."

"I have no power of prophecy there," said Mr. Farebrother, who had been
puffing at his pipe thoughtfully while Lydgate talked; "but as to the
hostility in the town, you'll weather it if you are prudent."

"How am I to be prudent?" said Lydgate, "I just do what comes before me
to do.  I can't help people's ignorance and spite, any more than
Vesalius could.  It isn't possible to square one's conduct to silly
conclusions which nobody can foresee."

"Quite true; I didn't mean that.  I meant only two things.  One is,
keep yourself as separable from Bulstrode as you can: of course, you
can go on doing good work of your own by his help; but don't get tied.
Perhaps it seems like personal feeling in me to say so--and there's a
good deal of that, I own--but personal feeling is not always in the
wrong if you boil it down to the impressions which make it simply an
opinion."

"Bulstrode is nothing to me," said Lydgate, carelessly, "except on
public grounds.  As to getting very closely united to him, I am not
fond enough of him for that.  But what was the other thing you meant?"
said Lydgate, who was nursing his leg as comfortably as possible, and
feeling in no great need of advice.

"Why, this.  Take care--experto crede--take care not to get hampered
about money matters.  I know, by a word you let fall one day, that you
don't like my playing at cards so much for money.  You are right enough
there.  But try and keep clear of wanting small sums that you haven't
got.  I am perhaps talking rather superfluously; but a man likes to
assume superiority over himself, by holding up his bad example and
sermonizing on it."

Lydgate took Mr. Farebrother's hints very cordially, though he would
hardly have borne them from another man.  He could not help remembering
that he had lately made some debts, but these had seemed inevitable,
and he had no intention now to do more than keep house in a simple way.
The furniture for which he owed would not want renewing; nor even the
stock of wine for a long while.

Many thoughts cheered him at that time--and justly.  A man conscious of
enthusiasm for worthy aims is sustained under petty hostilities by the
memory of great workers who had to fight their way not without wounds,
and who hover in his mind as patron saints, invisibly helping.  At
home, that same evening when he had been chatting with Mr. Farebrother,
he had his long legs stretched on the sofa, his head thrown back, and
his hands clasped behind it according to his favorite ruminating
attitude, while Rosamond sat at the piano, and played one tune after
another, of which her husband only knew (like the emotional elephant he
was!) that they fell in with his mood as if they had been melodious
sea-breezes.

There was something very fine in Lydgate's look just then, and any one
might have been encouraged to bet on his achievement.  In his dark eyes
and on his mouth and brow there was that placidity which comes from the
fulness of contemplative thought--the mind not searching, but
beholding, and the glance seeming to be filled with what is behind it.

Presently Rosamond left the piano and seated herself on a chair close
to the sofa and opposite her husband's face.

"Is that enough music for you, my lord?" she said, folding her hands
before her and putting on a little air of meekness.

"Yes, dear, if you are tired," said Lydgate, gently, turning his eyes
and resting them on her, but not otherwise moving.  Rosamond's presence
at that moment was perhaps no more than a spoonful brought to the lake,
and her woman's instinct in this matter was not dull.


"What is absorbing you?" she said, leaning forward and bringing her
face nearer to his.

He moved his hands and placed them gently behind her shoulders.

"I am thinking of a great fellow, who was about as old as I am three
hundred years ago, and had already begun a new era in anatomy."

"I can't guess," said Rosamond, shaking her head.  "We used to play at
guessing historical characters at Mrs. Lemon's, but not anatomists."

"I'll tell you.  His name was Vesalius.  And the only way he could get
to know anatomy as he did, was by going to snatch bodies at night, from
graveyards and places of execution."

"Oh!" said Rosamond, with a look of disgust on her pretty face, "I am
very glad you are not Vesalius.  I should have thought he might find
some less horrible way than that."

"No, he couldn't," said Lydgate, going on too earnestly to take much
notice of her answer.  "He could only get a complete skeleton by
snatching the whitened bones of a criminal from the gallows, and
burying them, and fetching them away by bits secretly, in the dead of
night."

"I hope he is not one of your great heroes," said Rosamond, half
playfully, half anxiously, "else I shall have you getting up in the
night to go to St. Peter's churchyard.  You know how angry you told me
the people were about Mrs. Goby.  You have enemies enough already."

"So had Vesalius, Rosy.  No wonder the medical fogies in Middlemarch
are jealous, when some of the greatest doctors living were fierce upon
Vesalius because they had believed in Galen, and he showed that Galen
was wrong.  They called him a liar and a poisonous monster.  But the
facts of the human frame were on his side; and so he got the better of
them."

"And what happened to him afterwards?" said Rosamond, with some
interest.

"Oh, he had a good deal of fighting to the last.  And they did
exasperate him enough at one time to make him burn a good deal of his
work.  Then he got shipwrecked just as he was coming from Jerusalem to
take a great chair at Padua.  He died rather miserably."

There was a moment's pause before Rosamond said, "Do you know, Tertius,
I often wish you had not been a medical man."

"Nay, Rosy, don't say that," said Lydgate, drawing her closer to him.
"That is like saying you wish you had married another man."

"Not at all; you are clever enough for anything: you might easily have
been something else.  And your cousins at Quallingham all think that
you have sunk below them in your choice of a profession."

"The cousins at Quallingham may go to the devil!" said Lydgate, with
scorn.  "It was like their impudence if they said anything of the sort
to you."

"Still," said Rosamond, "I do _not_ think it is a nice profession,
dear."  We know that she had much quiet perseverance in her opinion.

"It is the grandest profession in the world, Rosamond," said Lydgate,
gravely.  "And to say that you love me without loving the medical man
in me, is the same sort of thing as to say that you like eating a peach
but don't like its flavor.  Don't say that again, dear, it pains me."

"Very well, Doctor Grave-face," said Rosy, dimpling, "I will declare in
future that I dote on skeletons, and body-snatchers, and bits of things
in phials, and quarrels with everybody, that end in your dying
miserably."

"No, no, not so bad as that," said Lydgate, giving up remonstrance and
petting her resignedly.



CHAPTER XLVI.

    Pues no podemos haber aquello que queremos, queramos
    aquello que podremos.

    Since we cannot get what we like, let us like
    what we can get.
                                     --Spanish Proverb.


While Lydgate, safely married and with the Hospital under his command,
felt himself struggling for Medical Reform against Middlemarch,
Middlemarch was becoming more and more conscious of the national
struggle for another kind of Reform.

By the time that Lord John Russell's measure was being debated in the
House of Commons, there was a new political animation in Middlemarch,
and a new definition of parties which might show a decided change of
balance if a new election came.  And there were some who already
predicted this event, declaring that a Reform Bill would never be
carried by the actual Parliament.  This was what Will Ladislaw dwelt on
to Mr. Brooke as a reason for congratulation that he had not yet tried
his strength at the hustings.

"Things will grow and ripen as if it were a comet year," said Will.
"The public temper will soon get to a cometary heat, now the question
of Reform has set in.  There is likely to be another election before
long, and by that time Middlemarch will have got more ideas into its
head.  What we have to work at now is the 'Pioneer' and political
meetings."

"Quite right, Ladislaw; we shall make a new thing of opinion here,"
said Mr. Brooke.  "Only I want to keep myself independent about Reform,
you know; I don't want to go too far.  I want to take up
Wilberforce's and Romilly's line, you know, and work at Negro
Emancipation, Criminal Law--that kind of thing.  But of course I should
support Grey."

"If you go in for the principle of Reform, you must be prepared to take
what the situation offers," said Will.  "If everybody pulled for his
own bit against everybody else, the whole question would go to tatters."

"Yes, yes, I agree with you--I quite take that point of view.  I should
put it in that light.  I should support Grey, you know.  But I don't
want to change the balance of the constitution, and I don't think Grey
would."

"But that is what the country wants," said Will.  "Else there would be
no meaning in political unions or any other movement that knows what
it's about.  It wants to have a House of Commons which is not weighted
with nominees of the landed class, but with representatives of the
other interests.  And as to contending for a reform short of that, it
is like asking for a bit of an avalanche which has already begun to
thunder."

"That is fine, Ladislaw: that is the way to put it.  Write that down,
now.  We must begin to get documents about the feeling of the country,
as well as the machine-breaking and general distress."

"As to documents," said Will, "a two-inch card will hold plenty.  A few
rows of figures are enough to deduce misery from, and a few more will
show the rate at which the political determination of the people is
growing."

"Good: draw that out a little more at length, Ladislaw.  That is an
idea, now: write it out in the 'Pioneer.' Put the figures and deduce
the misery, you know; and put the other figures and deduce--and so on.
You have a way of putting things.  Burke, now:--when I think of Burke,
I can't help wishing somebody had a pocket-borough to give you,
Ladislaw.  You'd never get elected, you know.  And we shall always want
talent in the House: reform as we will, we shall always want talent.
That avalanche and the thunder, now, was really a little like Burke.  I
want that sort of thing--not ideas, you know, but a way of putting
them."

"Pocket-boroughs would be a fine thing," said Ladislaw, "if they were
always in the right pocket, and there were always a Burke at hand."

Will was not displeased with that complimentary comparison, even from
Mr. Brooke; for it is a little too trying to human flesh to be
conscious of expressing one's self better than others and never to have
it noticed, and in the general dearth of admiration for the right
thing, even a chance bray of applause falling exactly in time is rather
fortifying.  Will felt that his literary refinements were usually
beyond the limits of Middlemarch perception; nevertheless, he was
beginning thoroughly to like the work of which when he began he had
said to himself rather languidly, "Why not?"--and he studied the
political situation with as ardent an interest as he had ever given to
poetic metres or mediaevalism.  It is undeniable that but for the
desire to be where Dorothea was, and perhaps the want of knowing what
else to do, Will would not at this time have been meditating on the
needs of the English people or criticising English statesmanship: he
would probably have been rambling in Italy sketching plans for several
dramas, trying prose and finding it too jejune, trying verse and
finding it too artificial, beginning to copy "bits" from old pictures,
leaving off because they were "no good," and observing that, after all,
self-culture was the principal point; while in politics he would have
been sympathizing warmly with liberty and progress in general.  Our
sense of duty must often wait for some work which shall take the place
of dilettanteism and make us feel that the quality of our action is not
a matter of indifference.

Ladislaw had now accepted his bit of work, though it was not that
indeterminate loftiest thing which he had once dreamed of as alone
worthy of continuous effort.  His nature warmed easily in the presence
of subjects which were visibly mixed with life and action, and the
easily stirred rebellion in him helped the glow of public spirit.  In
spite of Mr. Casaubon and the banishment from Lowick, he was rather
happy; getting a great deal of fresh knowledge in a vivid way and for
practical purposes, and making the "Pioneer" celebrated as far as
Brassing (never mind the smallness of the area; the writing was not
worse than much that reaches the four corners of the earth).

Mr. Brooke was occasionally irritating; but Will's impatience was
relieved by the division of his time between visits to the Grange and
retreats to his Middlemarch lodgings, which gave variety to his life.

"Shift the pegs a little," he said to himself, "and Mr. Brooke might be
in the Cabinet, while I was Under-Secretary. That is the common order
of things: the little waves make the large ones and are of the same
pattern.  I am better here than in the sort of life Mr. Casaubon would
have trained me for, where the doing would be all laid down by a
precedent too rigid for me to react upon.  I don't care for prestige or
high pay."

As Lydgate had said of him, he was a sort of gypsy, rather enjoying the
sense of belonging to no class; he had a feeling of romance in his
position, and a pleasant consciousness of creating a little surprise
wherever he went.  That sort of enjoyment had been disturbed when he
had felt some new distance between himself and Dorothea in their
accidental meeting at Lydgate's, and his irritation had gone out
towards Mr. Casaubon, who had declared beforehand that Will would lose
caste.  "I never had any caste," he would have said, if that prophecy
had been uttered to him, and the quick blood would have come and gone
like breath in his transparent skin.  But it is one thing to like
defiance, and another thing to like its consequences.

Meanwhile, the town opinion about the new editor of the "Pioneer" was
tending to confirm Mr. Casaubon's view.  Will's relationship in that
distinguished quarter did not, like Lydgate's high connections, serve
as an advantageous introduction: if it was rumored that young Ladislaw
was Mr. Casaubon's nephew or cousin, it was also rumored that "Mr.
Casaubon would have nothing to do with him."

"Brooke has taken him up," said Mr. Hawley, "because that is what no
man in his senses could have expected.  Casaubon has devilish good
reasons, you may be sure, for turning the cold shoulder on a young
fellow whose bringing-up he paid for.  Just like Brooke--one of those
fellows who would praise a cat to sell a horse."

And some oddities of Will's, more or less poetical, appeared to support
Mr. Keck, the editor of the "Trumpet," in asserting that Ladislaw, if
the truth were known, was not only a Polish emissary but crack-brained,
which accounted for the preternatural quickness and glibness of his
speech when he got on to a platform--as he did whenever he had an
opportunity, speaking with a facility which cast reflections on solid
Englishmen generally.  It was disgusting to Keck to see a strip of a
fellow, with light curls round his head, get up and speechify by the
hour against institutions "which had existed when he was in his
cradle."  And in a leading article of the "Trumpet," Keck characterized
Ladislaw's speech at a Reform meeting as "the violence of an
energumen--a miserable effort to shroud in the brilliancy of fireworks
the daring of irresponsible statements and the poverty of a knowledge
which was of the cheapest and most recent description."

"That was a rattling article yesterday, Keck," said Dr. Sprague, with
sarcastic intentions.  "But what is an energumen?"

"Oh, a term that came up in the French Revolution," said Keck.

This dangerous aspect of Ladislaw was strangely contrasted with other
habits which became matter of remark.  He had a fondness, half
artistic, half affectionate, for little children--the smaller they were
on tolerably active legs, and the funnier their clothing, the better
Will liked to surprise and please them.  We know that in Rome he was
given to ramble about among the poor people, and the taste did not quit
him in Middlemarch.

He had somehow picked up a troop of droll children, little hatless boys
with their galligaskins much worn and scant shirting to hang out,
little girls who tossed their hair out of their eyes to look at him,
and guardian brothers at the mature age of seven.  This troop he had
led out on gypsy excursions to Halsell Wood at nutting-time, and since
the cold weather had set in he had taken them on a clear day to gather
sticks for a bonfire in the hollow of a hillside, where he drew out a
small feast of gingerbread for them, and improvised a Punch-and-Judy
drama with some private home-made puppets.  Here was one oddity.
Another was, that in houses where he got friendly, he was given to
stretch himself at full length on the rug while he talked, and was apt
to be discovered in this attitude by occasional callers for whom such
an irregularity was likely to confirm the notions of his dangerously
mixed blood and general laxity.

But Will's articles and speeches naturally recommended him in families
which the new strictness of party division had marked off on the side
of Reform.  He was invited to Mr. Bulstrode's; but here he could not
lie down on the rug, and Mrs. Bulstrode felt that his mode of talking
about Catholic countries, as if there were any truce with Antichrist,
illustrated the usual tendency to unsoundness in intellectual men.

At Mr. Farebrother's, however, whom the irony of events had brought on
the same side with Bulstrode in the national movement, Will became a
favorite with the ladies; especially with little Miss Noble, whom it
was one of his oddities to escort when he met her in the street with
her little basket, giving her his arm in the eyes of the town, and
insisting on going with her to pay some call where she distributed her
small filchings from her own share of sweet things.

But the house where he visited oftenest and lay most on the rug was
Lydgate's. The two men were not at all alike, but they agreed none the
worse.  Lydgate was abrupt but not irritable, taking little notice of
megrims in healthy people; and Ladislaw did not usually throw away his
susceptibilities on those who took no notice of them.  With Rosamond,
on the other hand, he pouted and was wayward--nay, often
uncomplimentary, much to her inward surprise; nevertheless he was
gradually becoming necessary to her entertainment by his companionship
in her music, his varied talk, and his freedom from the grave
preoccupation which, with all her husband's tenderness and indulgence,
often made his manners unsatisfactory to her, and confirmed her dislike
of the medical profession.

Lydgate, inclined to be sarcastic on the superstitious faith of the
people in the efficacy of "the bill," while nobody cared about the low
state of pathology, sometimes assailed Will with troublesome questions.
One evening in March, Rosamond in her cherry-colored dress with
swansdown trimming about the throat sat at the tea-table; Lydgate,
lately come in tired from his outdoor work, was seated sideways on an
easy-chair by the fire with one leg over the elbow, his brow looking a
little troubled as his eyes rambled over the columns of the "Pioneer,"
while Rosamond, having noticed that he was perturbed, avoided looking
at him, and inwardly thanked heaven that she herself had not a moody
disposition.  Will Ladislaw was stretched on the rug contemplating the
curtain-pole abstractedly, and humming very low the notes of "When
first I saw thy face;" while the house spaniel, also stretched out with
small choice of room, looked from between his paws at the usurper of
the rug with silent but strong objection.

Rosamond bringing Lydgate his cup of tea, he threw down the paper, and
said to Will, who had started up and gone to the table--

"It's no use your puffing Brooke as a reforming landlord, Ladislaw:
they only pick the more holes in his coat in the 'Trumpet.'"

"No matter; those who read the 'Pioneer' don't read the 'Trumpet,'"
said Will, swallowing his tea and walking about.  "Do you suppose the
public reads with a view to its own conversion?  We should have a
witches' brewing with a vengeance then--'Mingle, mingle, mingle,
mingle, You that mingle may'--and nobody would know which side he was
going to take."

"Farebrother says, he doesn't believe Brooke would get elected if the
opportunity came: the very men who profess to be for him would bring
another member out of the bag at the right moment."

"There's no harm in trying.  It's good to have resident members."

"Why?" said Lydgate, who was much given to use that inconvenient word
in a curt tone.

"They represent the local stupidity better," said Will, laughing, and
shaking his curls; "and they are kept on their best behavior in the
neighborhood.  Brooke is not a bad fellow, but he has done some good
things on his estate that he never would have done but for this
Parliamentary bite."

"He's not fitted to be a public man," said Lydgate, with contemptuous
decision.  "He would disappoint everybody who counted on him: I can see
that at the Hospital.  Only, there Bulstrode holds the reins and drives
him."

"That depends on how you fix your standard of public men," said Will.
"He's good enough for the occasion: when the people have made up their
mind as they are making it up now, they don't want a man--they only
want a vote."

"That is the way with you political writers, Ladislaw--crying up a
measure as if it were a universal cure, and crying up men who are a
part of the very disease that wants curing."

"Why not?  Men may help to cure themselves off the face of the land
without knowing it," said Will, who could find reasons impromptu, when
he had not thought of a question beforehand.

"That is no excuse for encouraging the superstitious exaggeration of
hopes about this particular measure, helping the cry to swallow it
whole and to send up voting popinjays who are good for nothing but to
carry it.  You go against rottenness, and there is nothing more
thoroughly rotten than making people believe that society can be cured
by a political hocus-pocus."

"That's very fine, my dear fellow.  But your cure must begin somewhere,
and put it that a thousand things which debase a population can never
be reformed without this particular reform to begin with.  Look what
Stanley said the other day--that the House had been tinkering long
enough at small questions of bribery, inquiring whether this or that
voter has had a guinea when everybody knows that the seats have been
sold wholesale.  Wait for wisdom and conscience in public
agents--fiddlestick!  The only conscience we can trust to is the
massive sense of wrong in a class, and the best wisdom that will work
is the wisdom of balancing claims.  That's my text--which side is
injured?  I support the man who supports their claims; not the virtuous
upholder of the wrong."

"That general talk about a particular case is mere question begging,
Ladislaw.  When I say, I go in for the dose that cures, it doesn't
follow that I go in for opium in a given case of gout."

"I am not begging the question we are upon--whether we are to try for
nothing till we find immaculate men to work with.  Should you go on
that plan?  If there were one man who would carry you a medical reform
and another who would oppose it, should you inquire which had the
better motives or even the better brains?"

"Oh, of course," said Lydgate, seeing himself checkmated by a move
which he had often used himself, "if one did not work with such men as
are at hand, things must come to a dead-lock. Suppose the worst opinion
in the town about Bulstrode were a true one, that would not make it
less true that he has the sense and the resolution to do what I think
ought to be done in the matters I know and care most about; but that is
the only ground on which I go with him," Lydgate added rather proudly,
bearing in mind Mr. Farebrother's remarks.  "He is nothing to me
otherwise; I would not cry him up on any personal ground--I would keep
clear of that."

"Do you mean that I cry up Brooke on any personal ground?" said Will
Ladislaw, nettled, and turning sharp round.  For the first time he felt
offended with Lydgate; not the less so, perhaps, because he would have
declined any close inquiry into the growth of his relation to Mr.
Brooke.

"Not at all," said Lydgate, "I was simply explaining my own action.  I
meant that a man may work for a special end with others whose motives
and general course are equivocal, if he is quite sure of his personal
independence, and that he is not working for his private
interest--either place or money."

"Then, why don't you extend your liberality to others?" said Will,
still nettled.  "My personal independence is as important to me as
yours is to you.  You have no more reason to imagine that I have
personal expectations from Brooke, than I have to imagine that you have
personal expectations from Bulstrode.  Motives are points of honor, I
suppose--nobody can prove them.  But as to money and place in the
world." Will ended, tossing back his head, "I think it is pretty clear
that I am not determined by considerations of that sort."

"You quite mistake me, Ladislaw," said Lydgate, surprised.  He had been
preoccupied with his own vindication, and had been blind to what
Ladislaw might infer on his own account.  "I beg your pardon for
unintentionally annoying you.  In fact, I should rather attribute to
you a romantic disregard of your own worldly interests.  On the
political question, I referred simply to intellectual bias."

"How very unpleasant you both are this evening!" said Rosamond.  "I
cannot conceive why money should have been referred to.  Polities and
Medicine are sufficiently disagreeable to quarrel upon.  You can both
of you go on quarrelling with all the world and with each other on
those two topics."

Rosamond looked mildly neutral as she said this, rising to ring the
bell, and then crossing to her work-table.

"Poor Rosy!" said Lydgate, putting out his hand to her as she was
passing him.  "Disputation is not amusing to cherubs.  Have some music.
Ask Ladislaw to sing with you."

When Will was gone Rosamond said to her husband, "What put you out of
temper this evening, Tertius?"

"Me?  It was Ladislaw who was out of temper.  He is like a bit of
tinder."

"But I mean, before that.  Something had vexed you before you came in,
you looked cross.  And that made you begin to dispute with Mr.
Ladislaw.  You hurt me very much when you look so, Tertius."

"Do I?  Then I am a brute," said Lydgate, caressing her penitently.

"What vexed you?"

"Oh, outdoor things--business."  It was really a letter insisting on
the payment of a bill for furniture.  But Rosamond was expecting to
have a baby, and Lydgate wished to save her from any perturbation.



CHAPTER XLVII.

    Was never true love loved in vain,
    For truest love is highest gain.
    No art can make it: it must spring
    Where elements are fostering.
        So in heaven's spot and hour
        Springs the little native flower,
        Downward root and upward eye,
        Shapen by the earth and sky.


It happened to be on a Saturday evening that Will Ladislaw had that
little discussion with Lydgate.  Its effect when he went to his own
rooms was to make him sit up half the night, thinking over again, under
a new irritation, all that he had before thought of his having settled
in Middlemarch and harnessed himself with Mr. Brooke.  Hesitations
before he had taken the step had since turned into susceptibility to
every hint that he would have been wiser not to take it; and hence came
his heat towards Lydgate--a heat which still kept him restless.  Was he
not making a fool of himself?--and at a time when he was more than
ever conscious of being something better than a fool?  And for what end?

Well, for no definite end.  True, he had dreamy visions of
possibilities: there is no human being who having both passions and
thoughts does not think in consequence of his passions--does not find
images rising in his mind which soothe the passion with hope or sting
it with dread.  But this, which happens to us all, happens to some with
a wide difference; and Will was not one of those whose wit "keeps the
roadway:" he had his bypaths where there were little joys of his own
choosing, such as gentlemen cantering on the highroad might have
thought rather idiotic.  The way in which he made a sort of happiness
for himself out of his feeling for Dorothea was an example of this.  It
may seem strange, but it is the fact, that the ordinary vulgar vision
of which Mr. Casaubon suspected him--namely, that Dorothea might become
a widow, and that the interest he had established in her mind might
turn into acceptance of him as a husband--had no tempting, arresting
power over him; he did not live in the scenery of such an event, and
follow it out, as we all do with that imagined "otherwise" which is our
practical heaven.  It was not only that he was unwilling to entertain
thoughts which could be accused of baseness, and was already uneasy in
the sense that he had to justify himself from the charge of
ingratitude--the latent consciousness of many other barriers between
himself and Dorothea besides the existence of her husband, had helped
to turn away his imagination from speculating on what might befall Mr.
Casaubon.  And there were yet other reasons.  Will, we know, could not
bear the thought of any flaw appearing in his crystal: he was at once
exasperated and delighted by the calm freedom with which Dorothea
looked at him and spoke to him, and there was something so exquisite in
thinking of her just as she was, that he could not long for a change
which must somehow change her.  Do we not shun the street version of a
fine melody?--or shrink from the news that the rarity--some bit of
chiselling or engraving perhaps--which we have dwelt on even with
exultation in the trouble it has cost us to snatch glimpses of it, is
really not an uncommon thing, and may be obtained as an every-day
possession?  Our good depends on the quality and breadth of our
emotion; and to Will, a creature who cared little for what are called
the solid things of life and greatly for its subtler influences, to
have within him such a feeling as he had towards Dorothea, was like the
inheritance of a fortune.  What others might have called the futility
of his passion, made an additional delight for his imagination: he was
conscious of a generous movement, and of verifying in his own
experience that higher love-poetry which had charmed his fancy.
Dorothea, he said to himself, was forever enthroned in his soul: no
other woman could sit higher than her footstool; and if he could have
written out in immortal syllables the effect she wrought within him, he
might have boasted after the example of old Drayton, that,--

        "Queens hereafter might be glad to live
         Upon the alms of her superfluous praise."

But this result was questionable.  And what else could he do for
Dorothea?  What was his devotion worth to her?  It was impossible to
tell.  He would not go out of her reach.  He saw no creature among her
friends to whom he could believe that she spoke with the same simple
confidence as to him.  She had once said that she would like him to
stay; and stay he would, whatever fire-breathing dragons might hiss
around her.

This had always been the conclusion of Will's hesitations.  But he was
not without contradictoriness and rebellion even towards his own
resolve.  He had often got irritated, as he was on this particular
night, by some outside demonstration that his public exertions with Mr.
Brooke as a chief could not seem as heroic as he would like them to be,
and this was always associated with the other ground of
irritation--that notwithstanding his sacrifice of dignity for
Dorothea's sake, he could hardly ever see her.  Whereupon, not being
able to contradict these unpleasant facts, he contradicted his own
strongest bias and said, "I am a fool."

Nevertheless, since the inward debate necessarily turned on Dorothea,
he ended, as he had done before, only by getting a livelier sense of
what her presence would be to him; and suddenly reflecting that the
morrow would be Sunday, he determined to go to Lowick Church and see
her.  He slept upon that idea, but when he was dressing in the rational
morning light, Objection said--

"That will be a virtual defiance of Mr. Casaubon's prohibition to visit
Lowick, and Dorothea will be displeased."

"Nonsense!" argued Inclination, "it would be too monstrous for him to
hinder me from going out to a pretty country church on a spring
morning.  And Dorothea will be glad."

"It will be clear to Mr. Casaubon that you have come either to annoy
him or to see Dorothea."

"It is not true that I go to annoy him, and why should I not go to see
Dorothea?  Is he to have everything to himself and be always
comfortable?  Let him smart a little, as other people are obliged to
do.  I have always liked the quaintness of the church and congregation;
besides, I know the Tuckers: I shall go into their pew."

Having silenced Objection by force of unreason, Will walked to Lowick
as if he had been on the way to Paradise, crossing Halsell Common and
skirting the wood, where the sunlight fell broadly under the budding
boughs, bringing out the beauties of moss and lichen, and fresh green
growths piercing the brown.  Everything seemed to know that it was
Sunday, and to approve of his going to Lowick Church.  Will easily felt
happy when nothing crossed his humor, and by this time the thought of
vexing Mr. Casaubon had become rather amusing to him, making his face
break into its merry smile, pleasant to see as the breaking of sunshine
on the water--though the occasion was not exemplary.  But most of us
are apt to settle within ourselves that the man who blocks our way is
odious, and not to mind causing him a little of the disgust which his
personality excites in ourselves.  Will went along with a small book
under his arm and a hand in each side-pocket, never reading, but
chanting a little, as he made scenes of what would happen in church and
coming out.  He was experimenting in tunes to suit some words of his
own, sometimes trying a ready-made melody, sometimes improvising.  The
words were not exactly a hymn, but they certainly fitted his Sunday
experience:--

        "O me, O me, what frugal cheer
           My love doth feed upon!
         A touch, a ray, that is not here,
           A shadow that is gone:

        "A dream of breath that might be near,
           An inly-echoed tone,
         The thought that one may think me dear,
           The place where one was known,

        "The tremor of a banished fear,
           An ill that was not done--
         O me, O me, what frugal cheer
           My love doth feed upon!"

Sometimes, when he took off his hat, shaking his head backward, and
showing his delicate throat as he sang, he looked like an incarnation
of the spring whose spirit filled the air--a bright creature, abundant
in uncertain promises.

The bells were still ringing when he got to Lowick, and he went into
the curate's pew before any one else arrived there.  But he was still
left alone in it when the congregation had assembled.  The curate's pew
was opposite the rector's at the entrance of the small chancel, and
Will had time to fear that Dorothea might not come while he looked
round at the group of rural faces which made the congregation from year
to year within the white-washed walls and dark old pews, hardly with
more change than we see in the boughs of a tree which breaks here and
there with age, but yet has young shoots.  Mr. Rigg's frog-face was
something alien and unaccountable, but notwithstanding this shock to
the order of things, there were still the Waules and the rural stock of
the Powderells in their pews side by side; brother Samuel's cheek had
the same purple round as ever, and the three generations of decent
cottagers came as of old with a sense of duty to their betters
generally--the smaller children regarding Mr. Casaubon, who wore the
black gown and mounted to the highest box, as probably the chief of all
betters, and the one most awful if offended.  Even in 1831 Lowick was
at peace, not more agitated by Reform than by the solemn tenor of the
Sunday sermon.  The congregation had been used to seeing Will at church
in former days, and no one took much note of him except the choir, who
expected him to make a figure in the singing.

Dorothea did at last appear on this quaint background, walking up the
short aisle in her white beaver bonnet and gray cloak--the same she had
worn in the Vatican.  Her face being, from her entrance, towards the
chancel, even her shortsighted eyes soon discerned Will, but there was
no outward show of her feeling except a slight paleness and a grave bow
as she passed him.  To his own surprise Will felt suddenly
uncomfortable, and dared not look at her after they had bowed to each
other.  Two minutes later, when Mr. Casaubon came out of the vestry,
and, entering the pew, seated himself in face of Dorothea, Will felt
his paralysis more complete.  He could look nowhere except at the choir
in the little gallery over the vestry-door: Dorothea was perhaps
pained, and he had made a wretched blunder.  It was no longer amusing
to vex Mr. Casaubon, who had the advantage probably of watching him and
seeing that he dared not turn his head.  Why had he not imagined this
beforehand?--but he could not expect that he should sit in that square
pew alone, unrelieved by any Tuckers, who had apparently departed from
Lowick altogether, for a new clergyman was in the desk.  Still he
called himself stupid now for not foreseeing that it would be
impossible for him to look towards Dorothea--nay, that she might feel
his coming an impertinence.  There was no delivering himself from his
cage, however; and Will found his places and looked at his book as if
he had been a school-mistress, feeling that the morning service had
never been so immeasurably long before, that he was utterly ridiculous,
out of temper, and miserable.  This was what a man got by worshipping
the sight of a woman!  The clerk observed with surprise that Mr.
Ladislaw did not join in the tune of Hanover, and reflected that he
might have a cold.

Mr. Casaubon did not preach that morning, and there was no change in
Will's situation until the blessing had been pronounced and every one
rose.  It was the fashion at Lowick for "the betters" to go out first.
With a sudden determination to break the spell that was upon him, Will
looked straight at Mr. Casaubon.  But that gentleman's eyes were on the
button of the pew-door, which he opened, allowing Dorothea to pass, and
following her immediately without raising his eyelids.  Will's glance
had caught Dorothea's as she turned out of the pew, and again she
bowed, but this time with a look of agitation, as if she were
repressing tears.  Will walked out after them, but they went on towards
the little gate leading out of the churchyard into the shrubbery, never
looking round.

It was impossible for him to follow them, and he could only walk back
sadly at mid-day along the same road which he had trodden hopefully in
the morning.  The lights were all changed for him both without and
within.



CHAPTER XLVIII

    Surely the golden hours are turning gray
    And dance no more, and vainly strive to run:
    I see their white locks streaming in the wind--
    Each face is haggard as it looks at me,
    Slow turning in the constant clasping round
    Storm-driven.


Dorothea's distress when she was leaving the church came chiefly from
the perception that Mr. Casaubon was determined not to speak to his
cousin, and that Will's presence at church had served to mark more
strongly the alienation between them.  Will's coming seemed to her
quite excusable, nay, she thought it an amiable movement in him towards
a reconciliation which she herself had been constantly wishing for.  He
had probably imagined, as she had, that if Mr. Casaubon and he could
meet easily, they would shake hands and friendly intercourse might
return.  But now Dorothea felt quite robbed of that hope.  Will was
banished further than ever, for Mr. Casaubon must have been newly
embittered by this thrusting upon him of a presence which he refused to
recognize.

He had not been very well that morning, suffering from some difficulty
in breathing, and had not preached in consequence; she was not
surprised, therefore, that he was nearly silent at luncheon, still less
that he made no allusion to Will Ladislaw.  For her own part she felt
that she could never again introduce that subject.  They usually spent
apart the hours between luncheon and dinner on a Sunday; Mr. Casaubon
in the library dozing chiefly, and Dorothea in her boudoir, where she
was wont to occupy herself with some of her favorite books.  There was
a little heap of them on the table in the bow-window--of various sorts,
from Herodotus, which she was learning to read with Mr. Casaubon, to
her old companion Pascal, and Keble's "Christian Year." But to-day
opened one after another, and could read none of them.  Everything
seemed dreary: the portents before the birth of Cyrus--Jewish
antiquities--oh dear!--devout epigrams--the sacred chime of favorite
hymns--all alike were as flat as tunes beaten on wood: even the spring
flowers and the grass had a dull shiver in them under the afternoon
clouds that hid the sun fitfully; even the sustaining thoughts which
had become habits seemed to have in them the weariness of long future
days in which she would still live with them for her sole companions.
It was another or rather a fuller sort of companionship that poor
Dorothea was hungering for, and the hunger had grown from the perpetual
effort demanded by her married life.  She was always trying to be what
her husband wished, and never able to repose on his delight in what she
was.  The thing that she liked, that she spontaneously cared to have,
seemed to be always excluded from her life; for if it was only granted
and not shared by her husband it might as well have been denied.  About
Will Ladislaw there had been a difference between them from the first,
and it had ended, since Mr. Casaubon had so severely repulsed
Dorothea's strong feeling about his claims on the family property, by
her being convinced that she was in the right and her husband in the
wrong, but that she was helpless.  This afternoon the helplessness was
more wretchedly benumbing than ever: she longed for objects who could
be dear to her, and to whom she could be dear.  She longed for work
which would be directly beneficent like the sunshine and the rain, and
now it appeared that she was to live more and more in a virtual tomb,
where there was the apparatus of a ghastly labor producing what would
never see the light.  Today she had stood at the door of the tomb and
seen Will Ladislaw receding into the distant world of warm activity and
fellowship--turning his face towards her as he went.

Books were of no use.  Thinking was of no use.  It was Sunday, and she
could not have the carriage to go to Celia, who had lately had a baby.
There was no refuge now from spiritual emptiness and discontent, and
Dorothea had to bear her bad mood, as she would have borne a headache.

After dinner, at the hour when she usually began to read aloud, Mr.
Casaubon proposed that they should go into the library, where, he said,
he had ordered a fire and lights.  He seemed to have revived, and to be
thinking intently.

In the library Dorothea observed that he had newly arranged a row of
his note-books on a table, and now he took up and put into her hand a
well-known volume, which was a table of contents to all the others.

"You will oblige me, my dear," he said, seating himself, "if instead of
other reading this evening, you will go through this aloud, pencil in
hand, and at each point where I say 'mark,' will make a cross with your
pencil.  This is the first step in a sifting process which I have long
had in view, and as we go on I shall be able to indicate to you certain
principles of selection whereby you will, I trust, have an intelligent
participation in my purpose."

This proposal was only one more sign added to many since his memorable
interview with Lydgate, that Mr. Casaubon's original reluctance to let
Dorothea work with him had given place to the contrary disposition,
namely, to demand much interest and labor from her.

After she had read and marked for two hours, he said, "We will take the
volume up-stairs--and the pencil, if you please--and in case of
reading in the night, we can pursue this task.  It is not wearisome to
you, I trust, Dorothea?"

"I prefer always reading what you like best to hear," said Dorothea,
who told the simple truth; for what she dreaded was to exert herself in
reading or anything else which left him as joyless as ever.

It was a proof of the force with which certain characteristics in
Dorothea impressed those around her, that her husband, with all his
jealousy and suspicion, had gathered implicit trust in the integrity of
her promises, and her power of devoting herself to her idea of the
right and best.  Of late he had begun to feel that these qualities were
a peculiar possession for himself, and he wanted to engross them.

The reading in the night did come.  Dorothea in her young weariness had
slept soon and fast: she was awakened by a sense of light, which seemed
to her at first like a sudden vision of sunset after she had climbed a
steep hill: she opened her eyes and saw her husband wrapped in his warm
gown seating himself in the arm-chair near the fire-place where the
embers were still glowing.  He had lit two candles, expecting that
Dorothea would awake, but not liking to rouse her by more direct means.

"Are you ill, Edward?" she said, rising immediately.

"I felt some uneasiness in a reclining posture.  I will sit here for a
time."  She threw wood on the fire, wrapped herself up, and said, "You
would like me to read to you?"

"You would oblige me greatly by doing so, Dorothea," said Mr. Casaubon,
with a shade more meekness than usual in his polite manner.  "I am
wakeful: my mind is remarkably lucid."

"I fear that the excitement may be too great for you," said Dorothea,
remembering Lydgate's cautions.

"No, I am not conscious of undue excitement.  Thought is easy."
Dorothea dared not insist, and she read for an hour or more on the same
plan as she had done in the evening, but getting over the pages with
more quickness.  Mr. Casaubon's mind was more alert, and he seemed to
anticipate what was coming after a very slight verbal indication,
saying, "That will do--mark that"--or "Pass on to the next head--I omit
the second excursus on Crete." Dorothea was amazed to think of the
bird-like speed with which his mind was surveying the ground where it
had been creeping for years.  At last he said--

"Close the book now, my dear.  We will resume our work to-morrow.  I
have deferred it too long, and would gladly see it completed.  But you
observe that the principle on which my selection is made, is to give
adequate, and not disproportionate illustration to each of the theses
enumerated in my introduction, as at present sketched.  You have
perceived that distinctly, Dorothea?"

"Yes," said Dorothea, rather tremulously.  She felt sick at heart.

"And now I think that I can take some repose," said Mr. Casaubon.  He
laid down again and begged her to put out the lights.  When she had
lain down too, and there was a darkness only broken by a dull glow on
the hearth, he said--

"Before I sleep, I have a request to make, Dorothea."

"What is it?" said Dorothea, with dread in her mind.

"It is that you will let me know, deliberately, whether, in case of my
death, you will carry out my wishes: whether you will avoid doing what
I should deprecate, and apply yourself to do what I should desire."

Dorothea was not taken by surprise: many incidents had been leading her
to the conjecture of some intention on her husband's part which might
make a new yoke for her.  She did not answer immediately.

"You refuse?" said Mr. Casaubon, with more edge in his tone.

"No, I do not yet refuse," said Dorothea, in a clear voice, the need of
freedom asserting itself within her; "but it is too solemn--I think it
is not right--to make a promise when I am ignorant what it will bind me
to.  Whatever affection prompted I would do without promising."

"But you would use your own judgment: I ask you to obey mine; you
refuse."

"No, dear, no!" said Dorothea, beseechingly, crushed by opposing fears.
"But may I wait and reflect a little while?  I desire with my whole
soul to do what will comfort you; but I cannot give any pledge
suddenly--still less a pledge to do I know not what."

"You cannot then confide in the nature of my wishes?"

"Grant me till to-morrow," said Dorothea, beseechingly.

"Till to-morrow then," said Mr. Casaubon.

Soon she could hear that he was sleeping, but there was no more sleep
for her.  While she constrained herself to lie still lest she should
disturb him, her mind was carrying on a conflict in which imagination
ranged its forces first on one side and then on the other.  She had no
presentiment that the power which her husband wished to establish over
her future action had relation to anything else than his work.  But it
was clear enough to her that he would expect her to devote herself to
sifting those mixed heaps of material, which were to be the doubtful
illustration of principles still more doubtful.  The poor child had
become altogether unbelieving as to the trustworthiness of that Key
which had made the ambition and the labor of her husband's life.  It
was not wonderful that, in spite of her small instruction, her judgment
in this matter was truer than his: for she looked with unbiassed
comparison and healthy sense at probabilities on which he had risked
all his egoism.  And now she pictured to herself the days, and months,
and years which she must spend in sorting what might be called
shattered mummies, and fragments of a tradition which was itself a
mosaic wrought from crushed ruins--sorting them as food for a theory
which was already withered in the birth like an elfin child.  Doubtless
a vigorous error vigorously pursued has kept the embryos of truth
a-breathing: the quest of gold being at the same time a questioning of
substances, the body of chemistry is prepared for its soul, and
Lavoisier is born.  But Mr. Casaubon's theory of the elements which
made the seed of all tradition was not likely to bruise itself unawares
against discoveries: it floated among flexible conjectures no more
solid than those etymologies which seemed strong because of likeness in
sound until it was shown that likeness in sound made them impossible:
it was a method of interpretation which was not tested by the necessity
of forming anything which had sharper collisions than an elaborate
notion of Gog and Magog: it was as free from interruption as a plan for
threading the stars together.  And Dorothea had so often had to check
her weariness and impatience over this questionable riddle-guessing, as
it revealed itself to her instead of the fellowship in high knowledge
which was to make life worthier!  She could understand well enough now
why her husband had come to cling to her, as possibly the only hope
left that his labors would ever take a shape in which they could be
given to the world.  At first it had seemed that he wished to keep even
her aloof from any close knowledge of what he was doing; but gradually
the terrible stringency of human need--the prospect of a too speedy
death--

And here Dorothea's pity turned from her own future to her husband's
past--nay, to his present hard struggle with a lot which had grown out
of that past: the lonely labor, the ambition breathing hardly under the
pressure of self-distrust; the goal receding, and the heavier limbs;
and now at last the sword visibly trembling above him!  And had she not
wished to marry him that she might help him in his life's labor?--But
she had thought the work was to be something greater, which she could
serve in devoutly for its own sake.  Was it right, even to soothe his
grief--would it be possible, even if she promised--to work as in a
treadmill fruitlessly?

And yet, could she deny him?  Could she say, "I refuse to content this
pining hunger?"  It would be refusing to do for him dead, what she was
almost sure to do for him living.  If he lived as Lydgate had said he
might, for fifteen years or more, her life would certainly be spent in
helping him and obeying him.

Still, there was a deep difference between that devotion to the living
and that indefinite promise of devotion to the dead.  While he lived,
he could claim nothing that she would not still be free to remonstrate
against, and even to refuse.  But--the thought passed through her mind
more than once, though she could not believe in it--might he not mean
to demand something more from her than she had been able to imagine,
since he wanted her pledge to carry out his wishes without telling her
exactly what they were?  No; his heart was bound up in his work only:
that was the end for which his failing life was to be eked out by hers.

And now, if she were to say, "No! if you die, I will put no finger to
your work"--it seemed as if she would be crushing that bruised heart.

For four hours Dorothea lay in this conflict, till she felt ill and
bewildered, unable to resolve, praying mutely.  Helpless as a child
which has sobbed and sought too long, she fell into a late morning
sleep, and when she waked Mr. Casaubon was already up.  Tantripp told
her that he had read prayers, breakfasted, and was in the library.

"I never saw you look so pale, madam," said Tantripp, a solid-figured
woman who had been with the sisters at Lausanne.

"Was I ever high-colored, Tantripp?" said Dorothea, smiling faintly.

"Well, not to say high-colored, but with a bloom like a Chiny rose.
But always smelling those leather books, what can be expected?  Do rest
a little this morning, madam.  Let me say you are ill and not able to
go into that close library."

"Oh no, no! let me make haste," said Dorothea.  "Mr. Casaubon wants me
particularly."

When she went down she felt sure that she should promise to fulfil his
wishes; but that would be later in the day--not yet.

As Dorothea entered the library, Mr. Casaubon turned round from the
table where he had been placing some books, and said--

"I was waiting for your appearance, my dear.  I had hoped to set to
work at once this morning, but I find myself under some indisposition,
probably from too much excitement yesterday.  I am going now to take a
turn in the shrubbery, since the air is milder."

"I am glad to hear that," said Dorothea.  "Your mind, I feared, was too
active last night."

"I would fain have it set at rest on the point I last spoke of,
Dorothea.  You can now, I hope, give me an answer."

"May I come out to you in the garden presently?" said Dorothea, winning
a little breathing space in that way.

"I shall be in the Yew-tree Walk for the next half-hour," said Mr.
Casaubon, and then he left her.

Dorothea, feeling very weary, rang and asked Tantripp to bring her some
wraps.  She had been sitting still for a few minutes, but not in any
renewal of the former conflict: she simply felt that she was going to
say "Yes" to her own doom: she was too weak, too full of dread at the
thought of inflicting a keen-edged blow on her husband, to do anything
but submit completely.  She sat still and let Tantripp put on her
bonnet and shawl, a passivity which was unusual with her, for she liked
to wait on herself.

"God bless you, madam!" said Tantripp, with an irrepressible movement
of love towards the beautiful, gentle creature for whom she felt unable
to do anything more, now that she had finished tying the bonnet.

This was too much for Dorothea's highly-strung feeling, and she burst
into tears, sobbing against Tantripp's arm.  But soon she checked
herself, dried her eyes, and went out at the glass door into the
shrubbery.

"I wish every book in that library was built into a caticom for your
master," said Tantripp to Pratt, the butler, finding him in the
breakfast-room. She had been at Rome, and visited the antiquities, as
we know; and she always declined to call Mr. Casaubon anything but
"your master," when speaking to the other servants.

Pratt laughed.  He liked his master very well, but he liked Tantripp
better.

When Dorothea was out on the gravel walks, she lingered among the
nearer clumps of trees, hesitating, as she had done once before, though
from a different cause.  Then she had feared lest her effort at
fellowship should be unwelcome; now she dreaded going to the spot where
she foresaw that she must bind herself to a fellowship from which she
shrank.  Neither law nor the world's opinion compelled her to
this--only her husband's nature and her own compassion, only the ideal
and not the real yoke of marriage.  She saw clearly enough the whole
situation, yet she was fettered: she could not smite the stricken soul
that entreated hers.  If that were weakness, Dorothea was weak.  But
the half-hour was passing, and she must not delay longer.  When she
entered the Yew-tree Walk she could not see her husband; but the walk
had bends, and she went, expecting to catch sight of his figure wrapped
in a blue cloak, which, with a warm velvet cap, was his outer garment
on chill days for the garden.  It occurred to her that he might be
resting in the summer-house, towards which the path diverged a little.
Turning the angle, she could see him seated on the bench, close to a
stone table.  His arms were resting on the table, and his brow was
bowed down on them, the blue cloak being dragged forward and screening
his face on each side.

"He exhausted himself last night," Dorothea said to herself, thinking
at first that he was asleep, and that the summer-house was too damp a
place to rest in.  But then she remembered that of late she had seen
him take that attitude when she was reading to him, as if he found it
easier than any other; and that he would sometimes speak, as well as
listen, with his face down in that way.  She went into the summerhouse
and said, "I am come, Edward; I am ready."

He took no notice, and she thought that he must be fast asleep.  She
laid her hand on his shoulder, and repeated, "I am ready!" Still he was
motionless; and with a sudden confused fear, she leaned down to him,
took off his velvet cap, and leaned her cheek close to his head, crying
in a distressed tone--

"Wake, dear, wake!  Listen to me.  I am come to answer." But Dorothea
never gave her answer.

Later in the day, Lydgate was seated by her bedside, and she was
talking deliriously, thinking aloud, and recalling what had gone
through her mind the night before.  She knew him, and called him by his
name, but appeared to think it right that she should explain everything
to him; and again, and again, begged him to explain everything to her
husband.

"Tell him I shall go to him soon: I am ready to promise.  Only,
thinking about it was so dreadful--it has made me ill.  Not very ill.
I shall soon be better.  Go and tell him."

But the silence in her husband's ear was never more to be broken.



CHAPTER XLIX.

    A task too strong for wizard spells
    This squire had brought about;
    'T is easy dropping stones in wells,
    But who shall get them out?"


"I wish to God we could hinder Dorothea from knowing this," said Sir
James Chettam, with a little frown on his brow, and an expression of
intense disgust about his mouth.

He was standing on the hearth-rug in the library at Lowick Grange, and
speaking to Mr. Brooke.  It was the day after Mr. Casaubon had been
buried, and Dorothea was not yet able to leave her room.

"That would be difficult, you know, Chettam, as she is an executrix,
and she likes to go into these things--property, land, that kind of
thing.  She has her notions, you know," said Mr. Brooke, sticking his
eye-glasses on nervously, and exploring the edges of a folded paper
which he held in his hand; "and she would like to act--depend upon it,
as an executrix Dorothea would want to act.  And she was twenty-one
last December, you know.  I can hinder nothing."

Sir James looked at the carpet for a minute in silence, and then
lifting his eyes suddenly fixed them on Mr. Brooke, saying, "I will
tell you what we can do.  Until Dorothea is well, all business must be
kept from her, and as soon as she is able to be moved she must come to
us.  Being with Celia and the baby will be the best thing in the world
for her, and will pass away the time.  And meanwhile you must get rid
of Ladislaw: you must send him out of the country." Here Sir James's
look of disgust returned in all its intensity.

Mr. Brooke put his hands behind him, walked to the window and
straightened his back with a little shake before he replied.

"That is easily said, Chettam, easily said, you know."

"My dear sir," persisted Sir James, restraining his indignation within
respectful forms, "it was you who brought him here, and you who keep
him here--I mean by the occupation you give him."

"Yes, but I can't dismiss him in an instant without assigning reasons,
my dear Chettam.  Ladislaw has been invaluable, most satisfactory.  I
consider that I have done this part of the country a service by
bringing him--by bringing him, you know."  Mr. Brooke ended with a nod,
turning round to give it.

"It's a pity this part of the country didn't do without him, that's all
I have to say about it.  At any rate, as Dorothea's brother-in-law, I
feel warranted in objecting strongly to his being kept here by any
action on the part of her friends.  You admit, I hope, that I have a
right to speak about what concerns the dignity of my wife's sister?"

Sir James was getting warm.

"Of course, my dear Chettam, of course.  But you and I have different
ideas--different--"

"Not about this action of Casaubon's, I should hope," interrupted Sir
James.  "I say that he has most unfairly compromised Dorothea.  I say
that there never was a meaner, more ungentlemanly action than this--a
codicil of this sort to a will which he made at the time of his
marriage with the knowledge and reliance of her family--a positive
insult to Dorothea!"

"Well, you know, Casaubon was a little twisted about Ladislaw.
Ladislaw has told me the reason--dislike of the bent he took, you
know--Ladislaw didn't think much of Casaubon's notions, Thoth and
Dagon--that sort of thing: and I fancy that Casaubon didn't like the
independent position Ladislaw had taken up.  I saw the letters between
them, you know.  Poor Casaubon was a little buried in books--he didn't
know the world."

"It's all very well for Ladislaw to put that color on it," said Sir
James.  "But I believe Casaubon was only jealous of him on Dorothea's
account, and the world will suppose that she gave him some reason; and
that is what makes it so abominable--coupling her name with this young
fellow's."

"My dear Chettam, it won't lead to anything, you know," said Mr.
Brooke, seating himself and sticking on his eye-glass again.  "It's all
of a piece with Casaubon's oddity.  This paper, now, 'Synoptical
Tabulation' and so on, 'for the use of Mrs. Casaubon,' it was locked up
in the desk with the will.  I suppose he meant Dorothea to publish his
researches, eh? and she'll do it, you know; she has gone into his
studies uncommonly."

"My dear sir," said Sir James, impatiently, "that is neither here nor
there.  The question is, whether you don't see with me the propriety of
sending young Ladislaw away?"

"Well, no, not the urgency of the thing.  By-and-by, perhaps, it may
come round.  As to gossip, you know, sending him away won't hinder
gossip.  People say what they like to say, not what they have chapter
and verse for," said Mr Brooke, becoming acute about the truths that
lay on the side of his own wishes.  "I might get rid of Ladislaw up to
a certain point--take away the 'Pioneer' from him, and that sort of
thing; but I couldn't send him out of the country if he didn't choose
to go--didn't choose, you know."

Mr. Brooke, persisting as quietly as if he were only discussing the
nature of last year's weather, and nodding at the end with his usual
amenity, was an exasperating form of obstinacy.

"Good God!" said Sir James, with as much passion as he ever showed,
"let us get him a post; let us spend money on him.  If he could go in
the suite of some Colonial Governor!  Grampus might take him--and I
could write to Fulke about it."

"But Ladislaw won't be shipped off like a head of cattle, my dear
fellow; Ladislaw has his ideas.  It's my opinion that if he were to
part from me to-morrow, you'd only hear the more of him in the country.
With his talent for speaking and drawing up documents, there are few
men who could come up to him as an agitator--an agitator, you know."

"Agitator!" said Sir James, with bitter emphasis, feeling that the
syllables of this word properly repeated were a sufficient exposure of
its hatefulness.

"But be reasonable, Chettam.  Dorothea, now.  As you say, she had
better go to Celia as soon as possible.  She can stay under your roof,
and in the mean time things may come round quietly.  Don't let us be
firing off our guns in a hurry, you know.  Standish will keep our
counsel, and the news will be old before it's known.  Twenty things may
happen to carry off Ladislaw--without my doing anything, you know."

"Then I am to conclude that you decline to do anything?"

"Decline, Chettam?--no--I didn't say decline.  But I really don't see
what I could do.  Ladislaw is a gentleman."

"I am glad to hear it!" said Sir James, his irritation making him
forget himself a little.  "I am sure Casaubon was not."

"Well, it would have been worse if he had made the codicil to hinder
her from marrying again at all, you know."

"I don't know that," said Sir James.  "It would have been less
indelicate."

"One of poor Casaubon's freaks!  That attack upset his brain a little.
It all goes for nothing.  She doesn't _want_ to marry Ladislaw."

"But this codicil is framed so as to make everybody believe that she
did.  I don't believe anything of the sort about Dorothea," said Sir
James--then frowningly, "but I suspect Ladislaw.  I tell you frankly,
I suspect Ladislaw."

"I couldn't take any immediate action on that ground, Chettam.  In
fact, if it were possible to pack him off--send him to Norfolk
Island--that sort of thing--it would look all the worse for Dorothea
to those who knew about it.  It would seem as if we distrusted
her--distrusted her, you know."

That Mr. Brooke had hit on an undeniable argument, did not tend to
soothe Sir James.  He put out his hand to reach his hat, implying that
he did not mean to contend further, and said, still with some heat--

"Well, I can only say that I think Dorothea was sacrificed once,
because her friends were too careless.  I shall do what I can, as her
brother, to protect her now."

"You can't do better than get her to Freshitt as soon as possible,
Chettam.  I approve that plan altogether," said Mr. Brooke, well
pleased that he had won the argument.  It would have been highly
inconvenient to him to part with Ladislaw at that time, when a
dissolution might happen any day, and electors were to be convinced of
the course by which the interests of the country would be best served.
Mr. Brooke sincerely believed that this end could be secured by his own
return to Parliament: he offered the forces of his mind honestly to the
nation.



CHAPTER L.

    "'This Loller here wol precilen us somewhat.'
     'Nay by my father's soule! that schal he nat,'
      Sayde the Schipman, 'here schal he not preche,
      We schal no gospel glosen here ne teche.
      We leven all in the gret God,' quod he.
      He wolden sowen some diffcultee."
                                 Canterbury Tales.


Dorothea had been safe at Freshitt Hall nearly a week before she had
asked any dangerous questions.  Every morning now she sat with Celia in
the prettiest of up-stairs sitting-rooms, opening into a small
conservatory--Celia all in white and lavender like a bunch of mixed
violets, watching the remarkable acts of the baby, which were so
dubious to her inexperienced mind that all conversation was interrupted
by appeals for their interpretation made to the oracular nurse.
Dorothea sat by in her widow's dress, with an expression which rather
provoked Celia, as being much too sad; for not only was baby quite
well, but really when a husband had been so dull and troublesome while
he lived, and besides that had--well, well!  Sir James, of course, had
told Celia everything, with a strong representation how important it
was that Dorothea should not know it sooner than was inevitable.

But Mr. Brooke had been right in predicting that Dorothea would not
long remain passive where action had been assigned to her; she knew the
purport of her husband's will made at the time of their marriage, and
her mind, as soon as she was clearly conscious of her position, was
silently occupied with what she ought to do as the owner of Lowick
Manor with the patronage of the living attached to it.

One morning when her uncle paid his usual visit, though with an unusual
alacrity in his manner which he accounted for by saying that it was now
pretty certain Parliament would be dissolved forthwith, Dorothea said--

"Uncle, it is right now that I should consider who is to have the
living at Lowick.  After Mr. Tucker had been provided for, I never
heard my husband say that he had any clergyman in his mind as a
successor to himself.  I think I ought to have the keys now and go to
Lowick to examine all my husband's papers.  There may be something that
would throw light on his wishes."

"No hurry, my dear," said Mr. Brooke, quietly.  "By-and-by, you know,
you can go, if you like.  But I cast my eyes over things in the desks
and drawers--there was nothing--nothing but deep subjects, you
know--besides the will.  Everything can be done by-and-by. As to the
living, I have had an application for interest already--I should say
rather good.  Mr. Tyke has been strongly recommended to me--I had
something to do with getting him an appointment before.  An apostolic
man, I believe--the sort of thing that would suit you, my dear."

"I should like to have fuller knowledge about him, uncle, and judge for
myself, if Mr. Casaubon has not left any expression of his wishes.  He
has perhaps made some addition to his will--there may be some
instructions for me," said Dorothea, who had all the while had this
conjecture in her mind with relation to her husband's work.

"Nothing about the rectory, my dear--nothing," said Mr. Brooke, rising
to go away, and putting out his hand to his nieces: "nor about his
researches, you know.  Nothing in the will."

Dorothea's lip quivered.

"Come, you must not think of these things yet, my dear.  By-and-by, you
know."

"I am quite well now, uncle; I wish to exert myself."

"Well, well, we shall see.  But I must run away now--I have no end of
work now--it's a crisis--a political crisis, you know.  And here is
Celia and her little man--you are an aunt, you know, now, and I am a
sort of grandfather," said Mr. Brooke, with placid hurry, anxious to
get away and tell Chettam that it would not be his (Mr. Brooke's) fault
if Dorothea insisted on looking into everything.

Dorothea sank back in her chair when her uncle had left the room, and
cast her eyes down meditatively on her crossed hands.

"Look, Dodo! look at him!  Did you ever see anything like that?" said
Celia, in her comfortable staccato.

"What, Kitty?" said Dorothea, lifting her eyes rather absently.

"What? why, his upper lip; see how he is drawing it down, as if he
meant to make a face.  Isn't it wonderful!  He may have his little
thoughts.  I wish nurse were here.  Do look at him."

A large tear which had been for some time gathering, rolled down
Dorothea's cheek as she looked up and tried to smile.

"Don't be sad, Dodo; kiss baby.  What are you brooding over so?  I am
sure you did everything, and a great deal too much.  You should be
happy now."

"I wonder if Sir James would drive me to Lowick.  I want to look over
everything--to see if there were any words written for me."

"You are not to go till Mr. Lydgate says you may go.  And he has not
said so yet (here you are, nurse; take baby and walk up and down the
gallery). Besides, you have got a wrong notion in your head as usual,
Dodo--I can see that: it vexes me."

"Where am I wrong, Kitty?" said Dorothea, quite meekly.  She was almost
ready now to think Celia wiser than herself, and was really wondering
with some fear what her wrong notion was.  Celia felt her advantage,
and was determined to use it.  None of them knew Dodo as well as she
did, or knew how to manage her.  Since Celia's baby was born, she had
had a new sense of her mental solidity and calm wisdom.  It seemed
clear that where there was a baby, things were right enough, and that
error, in general, was a mere lack of that central poising force.

"I can see what you are thinking of as well as can be, Dodo," said
Celia.  "You are wanting to find out if there is anything uncomfortable
for you to do now, only because Mr. Casaubon wished it.  As if you had
not been uncomfortable enough before.  And he doesn't deserve it, and
you will find that out.  He has behaved very badly.  James is as angry
with him as can be.  And I had better tell you, to prepare you."

"Celia," said Dorothea, entreatingly, "you distress me.  Tell me at
once what you mean."  It glanced through her mind that Mr. Casaubon
had left the property away from her--which would not be so very
distressing.

"Why, he has made a codicil to his will, to say the property was all to
go away from you if you married--I mean--"

"That is of no consequence," said Dorothea, breaking in impetuously.

"But if you married Mr. Ladislaw, not anybody else," Celia went on with
persevering quietude.  "Of course that is of no consequence in one
way--you never _would_ marry Mr. Ladislaw; but that only makes it worse
of Mr. Casaubon."

The blood rushed to Dorothea's face and neck painfully.  But Celia was
administering what she thought a sobering dose of fact.  It was taking
up notions that had done Dodo's health so much harm.  So she went on in
her neutral tone, as if she had been remarking on baby's robes.

"James says so.  He says it is abominable, and not like a gentleman.
And there never was a better judge than James.  It is as if Mr.
Casaubon wanted to make people believe that you would wish to marry Mr.
Ladislaw--which is ridiculous.  Only James says it was to hinder Mr.
Ladislaw from wanting to marry you for your money--just as if he ever
would think of making you an offer.  Mrs. Cadwallader said you might as
well marry an Italian with white mice!  But I must just go and look at
baby," Celia added, without the least change of tone, throwing a light
shawl over her, and tripping away.

Dorothea by this time had turned cold again, and now threw herself back
helplessly in her chair.  She might have compared her experience at
that moment to the vague, alarmed consciousness that her life was
taking on a new form, that she was undergoing a metamorphosis in which
memory would not adjust itself to the stirring of new organs.
Everything was changing its aspect: her husband's conduct, her own
duteous feeling towards him, every struggle between them--and yet
more, her whole relation to Will Ladislaw.  Her world was in a state of
convulsive change; the only thing she could say distinctly to herself
was, that she must wait and think anew.  One change terrified her as if
it had been a sin; it was a violent shock of repulsion from her
departed husband, who had had hidden thoughts, perhaps perverting
everything she said and did.  Then again she was conscious of another
change which also made her tremulous; it was a sudden strange yearning
of heart towards Will Ladislaw.  It had never before entered her mind
that he could, under any circumstances, be her lover: conceive the
effect of the sudden revelation that another had thought of him in that
light--that perhaps he himself had been conscious of such a
possibility,--and this with the hurrying, crowding vision of unfitting
conditions, and questions not soon to be solved.

It seemed a long while--she did not know how long--before she heard
Celia saying, "That will do, nurse; he will be quiet on my lap now.
You can go to lunch, and let Garratt stay in the next room." "What I
think, Dodo," Celia went on, observing nothing more than that Dorothea
was leaning back in her chair, and likely to be passive, "is that Mr.
Casaubon was spiteful.  I never did like him, and James never did.  I
think the corners of his mouth were dreadfully spiteful.  And now he
has behaved in this way, I am sure religion does not require you to
make yourself uncomfortable about him.  If he has been taken away, that
is a mercy, and you ought to be grateful.  We should not grieve, should
we, baby?" said Celia confidentially to that unconscious centre and
poise of the world, who had the most remarkable fists all complete even
to the nails, and hair enough, really, when you took his cap off, to
make--you didn't know what:--in short, he was Bouddha in a Western
form.

At this crisis Lydgate was announced, and one of the first things he
said was, "I fear you are not so well as you were, Mrs. Casaubon; have
you been agitated? allow me to feel your pulse."  Dorothea's hand was
of a marble coldness.

"She wants to go to Lowick, to look over papers," said Celia.  "She
ought not, ought she?"

Lydgate did not speak for a few moments.  Then he said, looking at
Dorothea.  "I hardly know.  In my opinion Mrs. Casaubon should do what
would give her the most repose of mind.  That repose will not always
come from being forbidden to act."

"Thank you," said Dorothea, exerting herself, "I am sure that is wise.
There are so many things which I ought to attend to.  Why should I sit
here idle?"  Then, with an effort to recall subjects not connected with
her agitation, she added, abruptly, "You know every one in Middlemarch,
I think, Mr. Lydgate.  I shall ask you to tell me a great deal.  I have
serious things to do now.  I have a living to give away.  You know Mr.
Tyke and all the--" But Dorothea's effort was too much for her; she
broke off and burst into sobs.  Lydgate made her drink a dose of sal
volatile.

"Let Mrs. Casaubon do as she likes," he said to Sir James, whom he
asked to see before quitting the house.  "She wants perfect freedom, I
think, more than any other prescription."

His attendance on Dorothea while her brain was excited, had enabled him
to form some true conclusions concerning the trials of her life.  He
felt sure that she had been suffering from the strain and conflict of
self-repression; and that she was likely now to feel herself only in
another sort of pinfold than that from which she had been released.

Lydgate's advice was all the easier for Sir James to follow when he
found that Celia had already told Dorothea the unpleasant fact about
the will.  There was no help for it now--no reason for any further
delay in the execution of necessary business.  And the next day Sir
James complied at once with her request that he would drive her to
Lowick.

"I have no wish to stay there at present," said Dorothea; "I could
hardly bear it.  I am much happier at Freshitt with Celia.  I shall be
able to think better about what should be done at Lowick by looking at
it from a distance.  And I should like to be at the Grange a little
while with my uncle, and go about in all the old walks and among the
people in the village."

"Not yet, I think.  Your uncle is having political company, and you are
better out of the way of such doings," said Sir James, who at that
moment thought of the Grange chiefly as a haunt of young Ladislaw's.
But no word passed between him and Dorothea about the objectionable
part of the will; indeed, both of them felt that the mention of it
between them would be impossible.  Sir James was shy, even with men,
about disagreeable subjects; and the one thing that Dorothea would have
chosen to say, if she had spoken on the matter at all, was forbidden to
her at present because it seemed to be a further exposure of her
husband's injustice.  Yet she did wish that Sir James could know what
had passed between her and her husband about Will Ladislaw's moral
claim on the property: it would then, she thought, be apparent to him
as it was to her, that her husband's strange indelicate proviso had
been chiefly urged by his bitter resistance to that idea of claim, and
not merely by personal feelings more difficult to talk about.  Also, it
must be admitted, Dorothea wished that this could be known for Will's
sake, since her friends seemed to think of him as simply an object of
Mr. Casaubon's charity.  Why should he be compared with an Italian
carrying white mice?  That word quoted from Mrs. Cadwallader seemed
like a mocking travesty wrought in the dark by an impish finger.

At Lowick Dorothea searched desk and drawer--searched all her husband's
places of deposit for private writing, but found no paper addressed
especially to her, except that "Synoptical Tabulation," which was
probably only the beginning of many intended directions for her
guidance.  In carrying out this bequest of labor to Dorothea, as in all
else, Mr. Casaubon had been slow and hesitating, oppressed in the plan
of transmitting his work, as he had been in executing it, by the sense
of moving heavily in a dim and clogging medium: distrust of Dorothea's
competence to arrange what he had prepared was subdued only by distrust
of any other redactor.  But he had come at last to create a trust for
himself out of Dorothea's nature: she could do what she resolved to do:
and he willingly imagined her toiling under the fetters of a promise to
erect a tomb with his name upon it.  (Not that Mr. Casaubon called the
future volumes a tomb; he called them the Key to all Mythologies.) But
the months gained on him and left his plans belated: he had only had
time to ask for that promise by which he sought to keep his cold grasp
on Dorothea's life.

The grasp had slipped away.  Bound by a pledge given from the depths of
her pity, she would have been capable of undertaking a toil which her
judgment whispered was vain for all uses except that consecration of
faithfulness which is a supreme use.  But now her judgment, instead of
being controlled by duteous devotion, was made active by the
imbittering discovery that in her past union there had lurked the
hidden alienation of secrecy and suspicion.  The living, suffering man
was no longer before her to awaken her pity: there remained only the
retrospect of painful subjection to a husband whose thoughts had been
lower than she had believed, whose exorbitant claims for himself had
even blinded his scrupulous care for his own character, and made him
defeat his own pride by shocking men of ordinary honor.  As for the
property which was the sign of that broken tie, she would have been
glad to be free from it and have nothing more than her original fortune
which had been settled on her, if there had not been duties attached to
ownership, which she ought not to flinch from.  About this property
many troublous questions insisted on rising: had she not been right in
thinking that the half of it ought to go to Will Ladislaw?--but was it
not impossible now for her to do that act of justice?  Mr. Casaubon had
taken a cruelly effective means of hindering her: even with indignation
against him in her heart, any act that seemed a triumphant eluding of
his purpose revolted her.

After collecting papers of business which she wished to examine, she
locked up again the desks and drawers--all empty of personal words for
her--empty of any sign that in her husband's lonely brooding his heart
had gone out to her in excuse or explanation; and she went back to
Freshitt with the sense that around his last hard demand and his last
injurious assertion of his power, the silence was unbroken.

Dorothea tried now to turn her thoughts towards immediate duties, and
one of these was of a kind which others were determined to remind her
of.  Lydgate's ear had caught eagerly her mention of the living, and as
soon as he could, he reopened the subject, seeing here a possibility of
making amends for the casting-vote he had once given with an
ill-satisfied conscience.  "Instead of telling you anything about Mr.
Tyke," he said, "I should like to speak of another man--Mr.
Farebrother, the Vicar of St. Botolph's.  His living is a poor one, and
gives him a stinted provision for himself and his family.  His mother,
aunt, and sister all live with him, and depend upon him.  I believe he
has never married because of them.  I never heard such good preaching
as his--such plain, easy eloquence.  He would have done to preach at
St. Paul's Cross after old Latimer.  His talk is just as good about all
subjects: original, simple, clear.  I think him a remarkable fellow: he
ought to have done more than he has done."

"Why has he not done more?" said Dorothea, interested now in all who
had slipped below their own intention.

"That's a hard question," said Lydgate.  "I find myself that it's
uncommonly difficult to make the right thing work: there are so many
strings pulling at once.  Farebrother often hints that he has got into
the wrong profession; he wants a wider range than that of a poor
clergyman, and I suppose he has no interest to help him on.  He is very
fond of Natural History and various scientific matters, and he is
hampered in reconciling these tastes with his position.  He has no
money to spare--hardly enough to use; and that has led him into
card-playing--Middlemarch is a great place for whist.  He does play for
money, and he wins a good deal.  Of course that takes him into company
a little beneath him, and makes him slack about some things; and yet,
with all that, looking at him as a whole, I think he is one of the most
blameless men I ever knew.  He has neither venom nor doubleness in him,
and those often go with a more correct outside."

"I wonder whether he suffers in his conscience because of that habit,"
said Dorothea; "I wonder whether he wishes he could leave it off."

"I have no doubt he would leave it off, if he were transplanted into
plenty: he would be glad of the time for other things."

"My uncle says that Mr. Tyke is spoken of as an apostolic man," said
Dorothea, meditatively.  She was wishing it were possible to restore
the times of primitive zeal, and yet thinking of Mr. Farebrother with a
strong desire to rescue him from his chance-gotten money.

"I don't pretend to say that Farebrother is apostolic," said Lydgate.
"His position is not quite like that of the Apostles: he is only a
parson among parishioners whose lives he has to try and make better.
Practically I find that what is called being apostolic now, is an
impatience of everything in which the parson doesn't cut the principal
figure.  I see something of that in Mr. Tyke at the Hospital: a good
deal of his doctrine is a sort of pinching hard to make people
uncomfortably aware of him.  Besides, an apostolic man at Lowick!--he
ought to think, as St. Francis did, that it is needful to preach to the
birds."

"True," said Dorothea.  "It is hard to imagine what sort of notions our
farmers and laborers get from their teaching.  I have been looking into
a volume of sermons by Mr. Tyke: such sermons would be of no use at
Lowick--I mean, about imputed righteousness and the prophecies in the
Apocalypse.  I have always been thinking of the different ways in which
Christianity is taught, and whenever I find one way that makes it a
wider blessing than any other, I cling to that as the truest--I mean
that which takes in the most good of all kinds, and brings in the most
people as sharers in it.  It is surely better to pardon too much, than
to condemn too much.  But I should like to see Mr. Farebrother and hear
him preach."

"Do," said Lydgate; "I trust to the effect of that.  He is very much
beloved, but he has his enemies too: there are always people who can't
forgive an able man for differing from them.  And that money-winning
business is really a blot.  You don't, of course, see many Middlemarch
people: but Mr. Ladislaw, who is constantly seeing Mr. Brooke, is a
great friend of Mr. Farebrother's old ladies, and would be glad to sing
the Vicar's praises.  One of the old ladies--Miss Noble, the aunt--is a
wonderfully quaint picture of self-forgetful goodness, and Ladislaw
gallants her about sometimes.  I met them one day in a back street: you
know Ladislaw's look--a sort of Daphnis in coat and waistcoat; and this
little old maid reaching up to his arm--they looked like a couple
dropped out of a romantic comedy.  But the best evidence about
Farebrother is to see him and hear him."

Happily Dorothea was in her private sitting-room when this conversation
occurred, and there was no one present to make Lydgate's innocent
introduction of Ladislaw painful to her.  As was usual with him in
matters of personal gossip, Lydgate had quite forgotten Rosamond's
remark that she thought Will adored Mrs. Casaubon.  At that moment he
was only caring for what would recommend the Farebrother family; and he
had purposely given emphasis to the worst that could be said about the
Vicar, in order to forestall objections.  In the weeks since Mr.
Casaubon's death he had hardly seen Ladislaw, and he had heard no rumor
to warn him that Mr. Brooke's confidential secretary was a dangerous
subject with Mrs. Casaubon.  When he was gone, his picture of Ladislaw
lingered in her mind and disputed the ground with that question of the
Lowick living.  What was Will Ladislaw thinking about her?  Would he
hear of that fact which made her cheeks burn as they never used to do?
And how would he feel when he heard it?--But she could see as well as
possible how he smiled down at the little old maid.  An Italian with
white mice!--on the contrary, he was a creature who entered into every
one's feelings, and could take the pressure of their thought instead of
urging his own with iron resistance.



CHAPTER LI.

    Party is Nature too, and you shall see
    By force of Logic how they both agree:
    The Many in the One, the One in Many;
    All is not Some, nor Some the same as Any:
    Genus holds species, both are great or small;
    One genus highest, one not high at all;
    Each species has its differentia too,
    This is not That, and He was never You,
    Though this and that are AYES, and you and he
    Are like as one to one, or three to three.


No gossip about Mr. Casaubon's will had yet reached Ladislaw: the air
seemed to be filled with the dissolution of Parliament and the coming
election, as the old wakes and fairs were filled with the rival clatter
of itinerant shows; and more private noises were taken little notice
of.  The famous "dry election" was at hand, in which the depths of
public feeling might be measured by the low flood-mark of drink.  Will
Ladislaw was one of the busiest at this time; and though Dorothea's
widowhood was continually in his thought, he was so far from wishing to
be spoken to on the subject, that when Lydgate sought him out to tell
him what had passed about the Lowick living, he answered rather
waspishly--

"Why should you bring me into the matter?  I never see Mrs. Casaubon,
and am not likely to see her, since she is at Freshitt.  I never go
there.  It is Tory ground, where I and the 'Pioneer' are no more
welcome than a poacher and his gun."

The fact was that Will had been made the more susceptible by observing
that Mr. Brooke, instead of wishing him, as before, to come to the
Grange oftener than was quite agreeable to himself, seemed now to
contrive that he should go there as little as possible.  This was a
shuffling concession of Mr. Brooke's to Sir James Chettam's indignant
remonstrance; and Will, awake to the slightest hint in this direction,
concluded that he was to be kept away from the Grange on Dorothea's
account.  Her friends, then, regarded him with some suspicion?  Their
fears were quite superfluous: they were very much mistaken if they
imagined that he would put himself forward as a needy adventurer trying
to win the favor of a rich woman.

Until now Will had never fully seen the chasm between himself and
Dorothea--until now that he was come to the brink of it, and saw her on
the other side.  He began, not without some inward rage, to think of
going away from the neighborhood: it would be impossible for him to
show any further interest in Dorothea without subjecting himself to
disagreeable imputations--perhaps even in her mind, which others might
try to poison.

"We are forever divided," said Will.  "I might as well be at Rome; she
would be no farther from me."  But what we call our despair is often
only the painful eagerness of unfed hope.  There were plenty of reasons
why he should not go--public reasons why he should not quit his post at
this crisis, leaving Mr. Brooke in the lurch when he needed "coaching"
for the election, and when there was so much canvassing, direct and
indirect, to be carried on.  Will could not like to leave his own
chessmen in the heat of a game; and any candidate on the right side,
even if his brain and marrow had been as soft as was consistent with a
gentlemanly bearing, might help to turn a majority.  To coach Mr.
Brooke and keep him steadily to the idea that he must pledge himself to
vote for the actual Reform Bill, instead of insisting on his
independence and power of pulling up in time, was not an easy task.
Mr. Farebrother's prophecy of a fourth candidate "in the bag" had not
yet been fulfilled, neither the Parliamentary Candidate Society nor any
other power on the watch to secure a reforming majority seeing a worthy
nodus for interference while there was a second reforming candidate
like Mr. Brooke, who might be returned at his own expense; and the
fight lay entirely between Pinkerton the old Tory member, Bagster the
new Whig member returned at the last election, and Brooke the future
independent member, who was to fetter himself for this occasion only.
Mr. Hawley and his party would bend all their forces to the return of
Pinkerton, and Mr. Brooke's success must depend either on plumpers
which would leave Bagster in the rear, or on the new minting of Tory
votes into reforming votes.  The latter means, of course, would be
preferable.

This prospect of converting votes was a dangerous distraction to Mr.
Brooke: his impression that waverers were likely to be allured by
wavering statements, and also the liability of his mind to stick afresh
at opposing arguments as they turned up in his memory, gave Will
Ladislaw much trouble.

"You know there are tactics in these things," said Mr. Brooke; "meeting
people half-way--tempering your ideas--saying, 'Well now, there's
something in that,' and so on.  I agree with you that this is a
peculiar occasion--the country with a will of its own--political
unions--that sort of thing--but we sometimes cut with rather too sharp
a knife, Ladislaw.  These ten-pound householders, now: why ten?  Draw
the line somewhere--yes: but why just at ten?  That's a difficult
question, now, if you go into it."

"Of course it is," said Will, impatiently.  "But if you are to wait
till we get a logical Bill, you must put yourself forward as a
revolutionist, and then Middlemarch would not elect you, I fancy.  As
for trimming, this is not a time for trimming."

Mr. Brooke always ended by agreeing with Ladislaw, who still appeared
to him a sort of Burke with a leaven of Shelley; but after an interval
the wisdom of his own methods reasserted itself, and he was again drawn
into using them with much hopefulness.  At this stage of affairs he was
in excellent spirits, which even supported him under large advances of
money; for his powers of convincing and persuading had not yet been
tested by anything more difficult than a chairman's speech introducing
other orators, or a dialogue with a Middlemarch voter, from which he
came away with a sense that he was a tactician by nature, and that it
was a pity he had not gone earlier into this kind of thing.  He was a
little conscious of defeat, however, with Mr. Mawmsey, a chief
representative in Middlemarch of that great social power, the retail
trader, and naturally one of the most doubtful voters in the
borough--willing for his own part to supply an equal quality of teas
and sugars to reformer and anti-reformer, as well as to agree
impartially with both, and feeling like the burgesses of old that this
necessity of electing members was a great burthen to a town; for even
if there were no danger in holding out hopes to all parties beforehand,
there would be the painful necessity at last of disappointing
respectable people whose names were on his books.  He was accustomed to
receive large orders from Mr. Brooke of Tipton; but then, there were
many of Pinkerton's committee whose opinions had a great weight of
grocery on their side.  Mr. Mawmsey thinking that Mr. Brooke, as not
too "clever in his intellects," was the more likely to forgive a grocer
who gave a hostile vote under pressure, had become confidential in his
back parlor.

"As to Reform, sir, put it in a family light," he said, rattling the
small silver in his pocket, and smiling affably.  "Will it support Mrs.
Mawmsey, and enable her to bring up six children when I am no more?  I
put the question _fictiously_, knowing what must be the answer.  Very
well, sir.  I ask you what, as a husband and a father, I am to do when
gentlemen come to me and say, 'Do as you like, Mawmsey; but if you vote
against us, I shall get my groceries elsewhere: when I sugar my liquor
I like to feel that I am benefiting the country by maintaining
tradesmen of the right color.'  Those very words have been spoken to
me, sir, in the very chair where you are now sitting.  I don't mean by
your honorable self, Mr. Brooke."

"No, no, no--that's narrow, you know.  Until my butler complains to me
of your goods, Mr. Mawmsey," said Mr. Brooke, soothingly, "until I hear
that you send bad sugars, spices--that sort of thing--I shall never
order him to go elsewhere."

"Sir, I am your humble servant, and greatly obliged," said Mr. Mawmsey,
feeling that politics were clearing up a little.  "There would be some
pleasure in voting for a gentleman who speaks in that honorable manner."

"Well, you know, Mr. Mawmsey, you would find it the right thing to put
yourself on our side.  This Reform will touch everybody by-and-by--a
thoroughly popular measure--a sort of A, B, C, you know, that must come
first before the rest can follow.  I quite agree with you that you've
got to look at the thing in a family light: but public spirit, now.
We're all one family, you know--it's all one cupboard.  Such a thing
as a vote, now: why, it may help to make men's fortunes at the
Cape--there's no knowing what may be the effect of a vote," Mr. Brooke
ended, with a sense of being a little out at sea, though finding it
still enjoyable.  But Mr. Mawmsey answered in a tone of decisive check.

"I beg your pardon, sir, but I can't afford that.  When I give a vote I
must know what I am doing; I must look to what will be the effects on
my till and ledger, speaking respectfully.  Prices, I'll admit, are
what nobody can know the merits of; and the sudden falls after you've
bought in currants, which are a goods that will not keep--I've never;
myself seen into the ins and outs there; which is a rebuke to human
pride.  But as to one family, there's debtor and creditor, I hope;
they're not going to reform that away; else I should vote for things
staying as they are.  Few men have less need to cry for change than I
have, personally speaking--that is, for self and family.  I am not one
of those who have nothing to lose: I mean as to respectability both in
parish and private business, and noways in respect of your honorable
self and custom, which you was good enough to say you would not
withdraw from me, vote or no vote, while the article sent in was
satisfactory."

After this conversation Mr. Mawmsey went up and boasted to his wife
that he had been rather too many for Brooke of Tipton, and that he
didn't mind so much now about going to the poll.

Mr. Brooke on this occasion abstained from boasting of his tactics to
Ladislaw, who for his part was glad enough to persuade himself that he
had no concern with any canvassing except the purely argumentative
sort, and that he worked no meaner engine than knowledge.  Mr. Brooke,
necessarily, had his agents, who understood the nature of the
Middlemarch voter and the means of enlisting his ignorance on the side
of the Bill--which were remarkably similar to the means of enlisting it
on the side against the Bill.  Will stopped his ears.  Occasionally
Parliament, like the rest of our lives, even to our eating and apparel,
could hardly go on if our imaginations were too active about processes.
There were plenty of dirty-handed men in the world to do dirty
business; and Will protested to himself that his share in bringing Mr.
Brooke through would be quite innocent.

But whether he should succeed in that mode of contributing to the
majority on the right side was very doubtful to him.  He had written
out various speeches and memoranda for speeches, but he had begun to
perceive that Mr. Brooke's mind, if it had the burthen of remembering
any train of thought, would let it drop, run away in search of it, and
not easily come back again.  To collect documents is one mode of
serving your country, and to remember the contents of a document is
another.  No! the only way in which Mr. Brooke could be coerced into
thinking of the right arguments at the right time was to be well plied
with them till they took up all the room in his brain.  But here there
was the difficulty of finding room, so many things having been taken in
beforehand.  Mr. Brooke himself observed that his ideas stood rather in
his way when he was speaking.

However, Ladislaw's coaching was forthwith to be put to the test, for
before the day of nomination Mr. Brooke was to explain himself to the
worthy electors of Middlemarch from the balcony of the White Hart,
which looked out advantageously at an angle of the market-place,
commanding a large area in front and two converging streets.  It was a
fine May morning, and everything seemed hopeful: there was some
prospect of an understanding between Bagster's committee and Brooke's,
to which Mr. Bulstrode, Mr. Standish as a Liberal lawyer, and such
manufacturers as Mr. Plymdale and Mr. Vincy, gave a solidity which
almost counterbalanced Mr. Hawley and his associates who sat for
Pinkerton at the Green Dragon.  Mr. Brooke, conscious of having
weakened the blasts of the "Trumpet" against him, by his reforms as a
landlord in the last half year, and hearing himself cheered a little as
he drove into the town, felt his heart tolerably light under his
buff-colored waistcoat.  But with regard to critical occasions, it
often happens that all moments seem comfortably remote until the last.

"This looks well, eh?" said Mr. Brooke as the crowd gathered.  "I shall
have a good audience, at any rate.  I like this, now--this kind of
public made up of one's own neighbors, you know."

The weavers and tanners of Middlemarch, unlike Mr. Mawmsey, had never
thought of Mr. Brooke as a neighbor, and were not more attached to him
than if he had been sent in a box from London.  But they listened
without much disturbance to the speakers who introduced the candidate,
one of them--a political personage from Brassing, who came to tell
Middlemarch its duty--spoke so fully, that it was alarming to think
what the candidate could find to say after him.  Meanwhile the crowd
became denser, and as the political personage neared the end of his
speech, Mr. Brooke felt a remarkable change in his sensations while he
still handled his eye-glass, trifled with documents before him, and
exchanged remarks with his committee, as a man to whom the moment of
summons was indifferent.

"I'll take another glass of sherry, Ladislaw," he said, with an easy
air, to Will, who was close behind him, and presently handed him the
supposed fortifier.  It was ill-chosen; for Mr. Brooke was an
abstemious man, and to drink a second glass of sherry quickly at no
great interval from the first was a surprise to his system which tended
to scatter his energies instead of collecting them.  Pray pity him: so
many English gentlemen make themselves miserable by speechifying on
entirely private grounds!  whereas Mr. Brooke wished to serve his
country by standing for Parliament--which, indeed, may also be done on
private grounds, but being once undertaken does absolutely demand some
speechifying.

It was not about the beginning of his speech that Mr. Brooke was at all
anxious; this, he felt sure, would be all right; he should have it
quite pat, cut out as neatly as a set of couplets from Pope.  Embarking
would be easy, but the vision of open sea that might come after was
alarming.  "And questions, now," hinted the demon just waking up in his
stomach, "somebody may put questions about the schedules.--Ladislaw,"
he continued, aloud, "just hand me the memorandum of the schedules."

When Mr. Brooke presented himself on the balcony, the cheers were quite
loud enough to counterbalance the yells, groans, brayings, and other
expressions of adverse theory, which were so moderate that Mr. Standish
(decidedly an old bird) observed in the ear next to him, "This looks
dangerous, by God!  Hawley has got some deeper plan than this."  Still,
the cheers were exhilarating, and no candidate could look more amiable
than Mr. Brooke, with the memorandum in his breast-pocket, his left
hand on the rail of the balcony, and his right trifling with his
eye-glass. The striking points in his appearance were his buff
waistcoat, short-clipped blond hair, and neutral physiognomy.  He began
with some confidence.

"Gentlemen--Electors of Middlemarch!"

This was so much the right thing that a little pause after it seemed
natural.

"I'm uncommonly glad to be here--I was never so proud and happy in my
life--never so happy, you know."

This was a bold figure of speech, but not exactly the right thing; for,
unhappily, the pat opening had slipped away--even couplets from Pope
may be but "fallings from us, vanishings," when fear clutches us, and a
glass of sherry is hurrying like smoke among our ideas.  Ladislaw, who
stood at the window behind the speaker, thought, "it's all up now.  The
only chance is that, since the best thing won't always do, floundering
may answer for once."  Mr. Brooke, meanwhile, having lost other clews,
fell back on himself and his qualifications--always an appropriate
graceful subject for a candidate.

"I am a close neighbor of yours, my good friends--you've known me on
the bench a good while--I've always gone a good deal into public
questions--machinery, now, and machine-breaking--you're many of you
concerned with machinery, and I've been going into that lately.  It
won't do, you know, breaking machines: everything must go on--trade,
manufactures, commerce, interchange of staples--that kind of
thing--since Adam Smith, that must go on.  We must look all over the
globe:--'Observation with extensive view,' must look everywhere, 'from
China to Peru,' as somebody says--Johnson, I think, 'The Rambler,' you
know.  That is what I have done up to a certain point--not as far as
Peru; but I've not always stayed at home--I saw it wouldn't do.  I've
been in the Levant, where some of your Middlemarch goods go--and then,
again, in the Baltic.  The Baltic, now."

Plying among his recollections in this way, Mr. Brooke might have got
along, easily to himself, and would have come back from the remotest
seas without trouble; but a diabolical procedure had been set up by the
enemy.  At one and the same moment there had risen above the shoulders
of the crowd, nearly opposite Mr. Brooke, and within ten yards of him,
the effigy of himself: buff-colored waistcoat, eye-glass, and neutral
physiognomy, painted on rag; and there had arisen, apparently in the
air, like the note of the cuckoo, a parrot-like, Punch-voiced echo of
his words.  Everybody looked up at the open windows in the houses at
the opposite angles of the converging streets; but they were either
blank, or filled by laughing listeners.  The most innocent echo has an
impish mockery in it when it follows a gravely persistent speaker, and
this echo was not at all innocent; if it did not follow with the
precision of a natural echo, it had a wicked choice of the words it
overtook.  By the time it said, "The Baltic, now," the laugh which had
been running through the audience became a general shout, and but for
the sobering effects of party and that great public cause which the
entanglement of things had identified with "Brooke of Tipton," the
laugh might have caught his committee.  Mr. Bulstrode asked,
reprehensively, what the new police was doing; but a voice could not
well be collared, and an attack on the effigy of the candidate would
have been too equivocal, since Hawley probably meant it to be pelted.

Mr. Brooke himself was not in a position to be quickly conscious of
anything except a general slipping away of ideas within himself: he had
even a little singing in the ears, and he was the only person who had
not yet taken distinct account of the echo or discerned the image of
himself.  Few things hold the perceptions more thoroughly captive than
anxiety about what we have got to say.  Mr. Brooke heard the laughter;
but he had expected some Tory efforts at disturbance, and he was at
this moment additionally excited by the tickling, stinging sense that
his lost exordium was coming back to fetch him from the Baltic.

"That reminds me," he went on, thrusting a hand into his side-pocket,
with an easy air, "if I wanted a precedent, you know--but we never want
a precedent for the right thing--but there is Chatham, now; I can't say
I should have supported Chatham, or Pitt, the younger Pitt--he was not
a man of ideas, and we want ideas, you know."

"Blast your ideas! we want the Bill," said a loud rough voice from the
crowd below.

Immediately the invisible Punch, who had hitherto followed Mr. Brooke,
repeated, "Blast your ideas! we want the Bill." The laugh was louder
than ever, and for the first time Mr. Brooke being himself silent,
heard distinctly the mocking echo.  But it seemed to ridicule his
interrupter, and in that light was encouraging; so he replied with
amenity--

"There is something in what you say, my good friend, and what do we
meet for but to speak our minds--freedom of opinion, freedom of the
press, liberty--that kind of thing?  The Bill, now--you shall have the
Bill"--here Mr. Brooke paused a moment to fix on his eye-glass and take
the paper from his breast-pocket, with a sense of being practical and
coming to particulars.  The invisible Punch followed:--

"You shall have the Bill, Mr. Brooke, per electioneering contest, and a
seat outside Parliament as delivered, five thousand pounds, seven
shillings, and fourpence."

Mr. Brooke, amid the roars of laughter, turned red, let his eye-glass
fall, and looking about him confusedly, saw the image of himself, which
had come nearer.  The next moment he saw it dolorously bespattered with
eggs.  His spirit rose a little, and his voice too.

"Buffoonery, tricks, ridicule the test of truth--all that is very
well"--here an unpleasant egg broke on Mr. Brooke's shoulder, as the
echo said, "All that is very well;" then came a hail of eggs, chiefly
aimed at the image, but occasionally hitting the original, as if by
chance.  There was a stream of new men pushing among the crowd;
whistles, yells, bellowings, and fifes made all the greater hubbub
because there was shouting and struggling to put them down.  No voice
would have had wing enough to rise above the uproar, and Mr. Brooke,
disagreeably anointed, stood his ground no longer.  The frustration
would have been less exasperating if it had been less gamesome and
boyish: a serious assault of which the newspaper reporter "can aver
that it endangered the learned gentleman's ribs," or can respectfully
bear witness to "the soles of that gentleman's boots having been
visible above the railing," has perhaps more consolations attached to
it.

Mr. Brooke re-entered the committee-room, saying, as carelessly as he
could, "This is a little too bad, you know.  I should have got the ear
of the people by-and-by--but they didn't give me time.  I should have
gone into the Bill by-and-by, you know," he added, glancing at
Ladislaw.  "However, things will come all right at the nomination."

But it was not resolved unanimously that things would come right; on
the contrary, the committee looked rather grim, and the political
personage from Brassing was writing busily, as if he were brewing new
devices.

"It was Bowyer who did it," said Mr. Standish, evasively.  "I know it
as well as if he had been advertised.  He's uncommonly good at
ventriloquism, and he did it uncommonly well, by God!  Hawley has been
having him to dinner lately: there's a fund of talent in Bowyer."

"Well, you know, you never mentioned him to me, Standish, else I would
have invited him to dine," said poor Mr. Brooke, who had gone through a
great deal of inviting for the good of his country.

"There's not a more paltry fellow in Middlemarch than Bowyer," said
Ladislaw, indignantly, "but it seems as if the paltry fellows were
always to turn the scale."

Will was thoroughly out of temper with himself as well as with his
"principal," and he went to shut himself in his rooms with a
half-formed resolve to throw up the "Pioneer" and Mr. Brooke together.
Why should he stay?  If the impassable gulf between himself and
Dorothea were ever to be filled up, it must rather be by his going away
and getting into a thoroughly different position than by staying here
and slipping into deserved contempt as an understrapper of Brooke's.
Then came the young dream of wonders that he might do--in five years,
for example: political writing, political speaking, would get a higher
value now public life was going to be wider and more national, and they
might give him such distinction that he would not seem to be asking
Dorothea to step down to him.  Five years:--if he could only be sure
that she cared for him more than for others; if he could only make her
aware that he stood aloof until he could tell his love without lowering
himself--then he could go away easily, and begin a career which at
five-and-twenty seemed probable enough in the inward order of things,
where talent brings fame, and fame everything else which is delightful.
He could speak and he could write; he could master any subject if he
chose, and he meant always to take the side of reason and justice, on
which he would carry all his ardor.  Why should he not one day be
lifted above the shoulders of the crowd, and feel that he had won that
eminence well?  Without doubt he would leave Middlemarch, go to town,
and make himself fit for celebrity by "eating his dinners."

But not immediately: not until some kind of sign had passed between him
and Dorothea.  He could not be satisfied until she knew why, even if he
were the man she would choose to marry, he would not marry her.  Hence
he must keep his post and bear with Mr. Brooke a little longer.

But he soon had reason to suspect that Mr. Brooke had anticipated him
in the wish to break up their connection.  Deputations without and
voices within had concurred in inducing that philanthropist to take a
stronger measure than usual for the good of mankind; namely, to
withdraw in favor of another candidate, to whom he left the advantages
of his canvassing machinery.  He himself called this a strong measure,
but observed that his health was less capable of sustaining excitement
than he had imagined.

"I have felt uneasy about the chest--it won't do to carry that too
far," he said to Ladislaw in explaining the affair.  "I must pull up.
Poor Casaubon was a warning, you know.  I've made some heavy advances,
but I've dug a channel.  It's rather coarse work--this electioneering,
eh, Ladislaw? dare say you are tired of it.  However, we have dug a
channel with the 'Pioneer'--put things in a track, and so on.  A more
ordinary man than you might carry it on now--more ordinary, you know."

"Do you wish me to give it up?" said Will, the quick color coming in
his face, as he rose from the writing-table, and took a turn of three
steps with his hands in his pockets.  "I am ready to do so whenever you
wish it."

"As to wishing, my dear Ladislaw, I have the highest opinion of your
powers, you know.  But about the 'Pioneer,' I have been consulting a
little with some of the men on our side, and they are inclined to take
it into their hands--indemnify me to a certain extent--carry it on, in
fact.  And under the circumstances, you might like to give up--might
find a better field.  These people might not take that high view of you
which I have always taken, as an alter ego, a right hand--though I
always looked forward to your doing something else.  I think of having
a run into France.  But I'll write you any letters, you know--to
Althorpe and people of that kind.  I've met Althorpe."

"I am exceedingly obliged to you," said Ladislaw, proudly.  "Since you
are going to part with the 'Pioneer,' I need not trouble you about the
steps I shall take.  I may choose to continue here for the present."

After Mr. Brooke had left him Will said to himself, "The rest of the
family have been urging him to get rid of me, and he doesn't care now
about my going.  I shall stay as long as I like.  I shall go of my own
movements and not because they are afraid of me."



CHAPTER LII.

                                 "His heart
    The lowliest duties on itself did lay."
                                 --WORDSWORTH.


On that June evening when Mr. Farebrother knew that he was to have the
Lowick living, there was joy in the old fashioned parlor, and even the
portraits of the great lawyers seemed to look on with satisfaction.
His mother left her tea and toast untouched, but sat with her usual
pretty primness, only showing her emotion by that flush in the cheeks
and brightness in the eyes which give an old woman a touching momentary
identity with her far-off youthful self, and saying decisively--

"The greatest comfort, Camden, is that you have deserved it."

"When a man gets a good berth, mother, half the deserving must come
after," said the son, brimful of pleasure, and not trying to conceal
it.  The gladness in his face was of that active kind which seems to
have energy enough not only to flash outwardly, but to light up busy
vision within: one seemed to see thoughts, as well as delight, in his
glances.

"Now, aunt," he went on, rubbing his hands and looking at Miss Noble,
who was making tender little beaver-like noises, "There shall be
sugar-candy always on the table for you to steal and give to the
children, and you shall have a great many new stockings to make
presents of, and you shall darn your own more than ever!"

Miss Noble nodded at her nephew with a subdued half-frightened laugh,
conscious of having already dropped an additional lump of sugar into
her basket on the strength of the new preferment.

"As for you, Winny"--the Vicar went on--"I shall make no difficulty
about your marrying any Lowick bachelor--Mr. Solomon Featherstone, for
example, as soon as I find you are in love with him."

Miss Winifred, who had been looking at her brother all the while and
crying heartily, which was her way of rejoicing, smiled through her
tears and said, "You must set me the example, Cam: _you_ must marry
now."

"With all my heart.  But who is in love with me?  I am a seedy old
fellow," said the Vicar, rising, pushing his chair away and looking
down at himself.  "What do you say, mother?"

"You are a handsome man, Camden: though not so fine a figure of a man
as your father," said the old lady.

"I wish you would marry Miss Garth, brother," said Miss Winifred.  "She
would make us so lively at Lowick."

"Very fine! You talk as if young women were tied up to be chosen, like
poultry at market; as if I had only to ask and everybody would have
me," said the Vicar, not caring to specify.

"We don't want everybody," said Miss Winifred.  "But _you_ would like
Miss Garth, mother, shouldn't you?"

"My son's choice shall be mine," said Mrs. Farebrother, with majestic
discretion, "and a wife would be most welcome, Camden.  You will want
your whist at home when we go to Lowick, and Henrietta Noble never was
a whist-player." (Mrs. Farebrother always called her tiny old sister by
that magnificent name.)

"I shall do without whist now, mother."

"Why so, Camden?  In my time whist was thought an undeniable amusement
for a good churchman," said Mrs. Farebrother, innocent of the meaning
that whist had for her son, and speaking rather sharply, as at some
dangerous countenancing of new doctrine.

"I shall be too busy for whist; I shall have two parishes," said the
Vicar, preferring not to discuss the virtues of that game.

He had already said to Dorothea, "I don't feel bound to give up St.
Botolph's. It is protest enough against the pluralism they want to
reform if I give somebody else most of the money.  The stronger thing
is not to give up power, but to use it well."

"I have thought of that," said Dorothea.  "So far as self is concerned,
I think it would be easier to give up power and money than to keep
them.  It seems very unfitting that I should have this patronage, yet I
felt that I ought not to let it be used by some one else instead of me."

"It is I who am bound to act so that you will not regret your power,"
said Mr. Farebrother.

His was one of the natures in which conscience gets the more active
when the yoke of life ceases to gall them.  He made no display of
humility on the subject, but in his heart he felt rather ashamed that
his conduct had shown laches which others who did not get benefices
were free from.

"I used often to wish I had been something else than a clergyman," he
said to Lydgate, "but perhaps it will be better to try and make as good
a clergyman out of myself as I can.  That is the well-beneficed point
of view, you perceive, from which difficulties are much simplified," he
ended, smiling.

The Vicar did feel then as if his share of duties would be easy.  But
Duty has a trick of behaving unexpectedly--something like a heavy
friend whom we have amiably asked to visit us, and who breaks his leg
within our gates.

Hardly a week later, Duty presented itself in his study under the
disguise of Fred Vincy, now returned from Omnibus College with his
bachelor's degree.

"I am ashamed to trouble you, Mr. Farebrother," said Fred, whose fair
open face was propitiating, "but you are the only friend I can consult.
I told you everything once before, and you were so good that I can't
help coming to you again."

"Sit down, Fred, I'm ready to hear and do anything I can," said the
Vicar, who was busy packing some small objects for removal, and went on
with his work.

"I wanted to tell you--" Fred hesitated an instant and then went on
plungingly, "I might go into the Church now; and really, look where I
may, I can't see anything else to do.  I don't like it, but I know it's
uncommonly hard on my father to say so, after he has spent a good deal
of money in educating me for it." Fred paused again an instant, and
then repeated, "and I can't see anything else to do."

"I did talk to your father about it, Fred, but I made little way with
him.  He said it was too late.  But you have got over one bridge now:
what are your other difficulties?"

"Merely that I don't like it.  I don't like divinity, and preaching,
and feeling obliged to look serious.  I like riding across country, and
doing as other men do.  I don't mean that I want to be a bad fellow in
any way; but I've no taste for the sort of thing people expect of a
clergyman.  And yet what else am I to do?  My father can't spare me any
capital, else I might go into farming.  And he has no room for me in
his trade.  And of course I can't begin to study for law or physic now,
when my father wants me to earn something.  It's all very well to say
I'm wrong to go into the Church; but those who say so might as well
tell me to go into the backwoods."

Fred's voice had taken a tone of grumbling remonstrance, and Mr.
Farebrother might have been inclined to smile if his mind had not been
too busy in imagining more than Fred told him.

"Have you any difficulties about doctrines--about the Articles?" he
said, trying hard to think of the question simply for Fred's sake.

"No; I suppose the Articles are right.  I am not prepared with any
arguments to disprove them, and much better, cleverer fellows than I am
go in for them entirely.  I think it would be rather ridiculous in me
to urge scruples of that sort, as if I were a judge," said Fred, quite
simply.

"I suppose, then, it has occurred to you that you might be a fair
parish priest without being much of a divine?"

"Of course, if I am obliged to be a clergyman, I shall try and do my
duty, though I mayn't like it.  Do you think any body ought to blame
me?"

"For going into the Church under the circumstances?  That depends on
your conscience, Fred--how far you have counted the cost, and seen what
your position will require of you.  I can only tell you about myself,
that I have always been too lax, and have been uneasy in consequence."

"But there is another hindrance," said Fred, coloring.  "I did not tell
you before, though perhaps I may have said things that made you guess
it.  There is somebody I am very fond of: I have loved her ever since
we were children."

"Miss Garth, I suppose?" said the Vicar, examining some labels very
closely.

"Yes.  I shouldn't mind anything if she would have me.  And I know I
could be a good fellow then."

"And you think she returns the feeling?"

"She never will say so; and a good while ago she made me promise not to
speak to her about it again.  And she has set her mind especially
against my being a clergyman; I know that.  But I can't give her up.  I
do think she cares about me.  I saw Mrs. Garth last night, and she said
that Mary was staying at Lowick Rectory with Miss Farebrother."

"Yes, she is very kindly helping my sister.  Do you wish to go there?"

"No, I want to ask a great favor of you.  I am ashamed to bother you in
this way; but Mary might listen to what you said, if you mentioned the
subject to her--I mean about my going into the Church."

"That is rather a delicate task, my dear Fred.  I shall have to
presuppose your attachment to her; and to enter on the subject as you
wish me to do, will be asking her to tell me whether she returns it."

"That is what I want her to tell you," said Fred, bluntly.  "I don't
know what to do, unless I can get at her feeling."

"You mean that you would be guided by that as to your going into the
Church?"

"If Mary said she would never have me I might as well go wrong in one
way as another."

"That is nonsense, Fred.  Men outlive their love, but they don't
outlive the consequences of their recklessness."

"Not my sort of love: I have never been without loving Mary.  If I had
to give her up, it would be like beginning to live on wooden legs."

"Will she not be hurt at my intrusion?"

"No, I feel sure she will not.  She respects you more than any one, and
she would not put you off with fun as she does me.  Of course I could
not have told any one else, or asked any one else to speak to her, but
you.  There is no one else who could be such a friend to both of us."
Fred paused a moment, and then said, rather complainingly, "And she
ought to acknowledge that I have worked in order to pass.  She ought to
believe that I would exert myself for her sake."

There was a moment's silence before Mr. Farebrother laid down his work,
and putting out his hand to Fred said--

"Very well, my boy.  I will do what you wish."

That very day Mr. Farebrother went to Lowick parsonage on the nag which
he had just set up.  "Decidedly I am an old stalk," he thought, "the
young growths are pushing me aside."

He found Mary in the garden gathering roses and sprinkling the petals
on a sheet.  The sun was low, and tall trees sent their shadows across
the grassy walks where Mary was moving without bonnet or parasol.  She
did not observe Mr. Farebrother's approach along the grass, and had
just stooped down to lecture a small black-and-tan terrier, which would
persist in walking on the sheet and smelling at the rose-leaves as Mary
sprinkled them.  She took his fore-paws in one hand, and lifted up the
forefinger of the other, while the dog wrinkled his brows and looked
embarrassed.  "Fly, Fly, I am ashamed of you," Mary was saying in a
grave contralto.  "This is not becoming in a sensible dog; anybody
would think you were a silly young gentleman."

"You are unmerciful to young gentlemen, Miss Garth," said the Vicar,
within two yards of her.

Mary started up and blushed.  "It always answers to reason with Fly,"
she said, laughingly.

"But not with young gentlemen?"

"Oh, with some, I suppose; since some of them turn into excellent men."

"I am glad of that admission, because I want at this very moment to
interest you in a young gentleman."

"Not a silly one, I hope," said Mary, beginning to pluck the roses
again, and feeling her heart beat uncomfortably.

"No; though perhaps wisdom is not his strong point, but rather
affection and sincerity.  However, wisdom lies more in those two
qualities than people are apt to imagine.  I hope you know by those
marks what young gentleman I mean."

"Yes, I think I do," said Mary, bravely, her face getting more serious,
and her hands cold; "it must be Fred Vincy."

"He has asked me to consult you about his going into the Church.  I
hope you will not think that I consented to take a liberty in promising
to do so."

"On the contrary, Mr. Farebrother," said Mary, giving up the roses, and
folding her arms, but unable to look up, "whenever you have anything to
say to me I feel honored."

"But before I enter on that question, let me just touch a point on
which your father took me into confidence; by the way, it was that very
evening on which I once before fulfilled a mission from Fred, just
after he had gone to college.  Mr. Garth told me what happened on the
night of Featherstone's death--how you refused to burn the will; and he
said that you had some heart-prickings on that subject, because you had
been the innocent means of hindering Fred from getting his ten thousand
pounds.  I have kept that in mind, and I have heard something that may
relieve you on that score--may show you that no sin-offering is
demanded from you there."

Mr. Farebrother paused a moment and looked at Mary.  He meant to give
Fred his full advantage, but it would be well, he thought, to clear her
mind of any superstitions, such as women sometimes follow when they do
a man the wrong of marrying him as an act of atonement.  Mary's cheeks
had begun to burn a little, and she was mute.

"I mean, that your action made no real difference to Fred's lot.  I
find that the first will would not have been legally good after the
burning of the last; it would not have stood if it had been disputed,
and you may be sure it would have been disputed.  So, on that score,
you may feel your mind free."

"Thank you, Mr. Farebrother," said Mary, earnestly.  "I am grateful to
you for remembering my feelings."

"Well, now I may go on.  Fred, you know, has taken his degree.  He has
worked his way so far, and now the question is, what is he to do?  That
question is so difficult that he is inclined to follow his father's
wishes and enter the Church, though you know better than I do that he
was quite set against that formerly.  I have questioned him on the
subject, and I confess I see no insuperable objection to his being a
clergyman, as things go.  He says that he could turn his mind to doing
his best in that vocation, on one condition.  If that condition were
fulfilled I would do my utmost in helping Fred on.  After a time--not,
of course, at first--he might be with me as my curate, and he would
have so much to do that his stipend would be nearly what I used to get
as vicar.  But I repeat that there is a condition without which all
this good cannot come to pass.  He has opened his heart to me, Miss
Garth, and asked me to plead for him.  The condition lies entirely in
your feeling."

Mary looked so much moved, that he said after a moment, "Let us walk a
little;" and when they were walking he added, "To speak quite plainly,
Fred will not take any course which would lessen the chance that you
would consent to be his wife; but with that prospect, he will try his
best at anything you approve."

"I cannot possibly say that I will ever be his wife, Mr. Farebrother:
but I certainly never will be his wife if he becomes a clergyman.  What
you say is most generous and kind; I don't mean for a moment to correct
your judgment.  It is only that I have my girlish, mocking way of
looking at things," said Mary, with a returning sparkle of playfulness
in her answer which only made its modesty more charming.

"He wishes me to report exactly what you think," said Mr. Farebrother.

"I could not love a man who is ridiculous," said Mary, not choosing to
go deeper.  "Fred has sense and knowledge enough to make him
respectable, if he likes, in some good worldly business, but I can
never imagine him preaching and exhorting, and pronouncing blessings,
and praying by the sick, without feeling as if I were looking at a
caricature.  His being a clergyman would be only for gentility's sake,
and I think there is nothing more contemptible than such imbecile
gentility.  I used to think that of Mr. Crowse, with his empty face and
neat umbrella, and mincing little speeches.  What right have such men
to represent Christianity--as if it were an institution for getting up
idiots genteelly--as if--" Mary checked herself.  She had been carried
along as if she had been speaking to Fred instead of Mr. Farebrother.

"Young women are severe: they don't feel the stress of action as men
do, though perhaps I ought to make you an exception there.  But you
don't put Fred Vincy on so low a level as that?"

"No, indeed, he has plenty of sense, but I think he would not show it
as a clergyman.  He would be a piece of professional affectation."

"Then the answer is quite decided.  As a clergyman he could have no
hope?"

Mary shook her head.

"But if he braved all the difficulties of getting his bread in some
other way--will you give him the support of hope?  May he count on
winning you?"

"I think Fred ought not to need telling again what I have already said
to him," Mary answered, with a slight resentment in her manner.  "I
mean that he ought not to put such questions until he has done
something worthy, instead of saying that he could do it."

Mr. Farebrother was silent for a minute or more, and then, as they
turned and paused under the shadow of a maple at the end of a grassy
walk, said, "I understand that you resist any attempt to fetter you,
but either your feeling for Fred Vincy excludes your entertaining
another attachment, or it does not: either he may count on your
remaining single until he shall have earned your hand, or he may in any
case be disappointed.  Pardon me, Mary--you know I used to catechise
you under that name--but when the state of a woman's affections touches
the happiness of another life--of more lives than one--I think it would
be the nobler course for her to be perfectly direct and open."

Mary in her turn was silent, wondering not at Mr. Farebrother's manner
but at his tone, which had a grave restrained emotion in it.  When the
strange idea flashed across her that his words had reference to
himself, she was incredulous, and ashamed of entertaining it.  She had
never thought that any man could love her except Fred, who had espoused
her with the umbrella ring, when she wore socks and little strapped
shoes; still less that she could be of any importance to Mr.
Farebrother, the cleverest man in her narrow circle.  She had only time
to feel that all this was hazy and perhaps illusory; but one thing was
clear and determined--her answer.

"Since you think it my duty, Mr. Farebrother, I will tell you that I
have too strong a feeling for Fred to give him up for any one else.  I
should never be quite happy if I thought he was unhappy for the loss of
me.  It has taken such deep root in me--my gratitude to him for always
loving me best, and minding so much if I hurt myself, from the time
when we were very little.  I cannot imagine any new feeling coming to
make that weaker.  I should like better than anything to see him worthy
of every one's respect.  But please tell him I will not promise to
marry him till then: I should shame and grieve my father and mother.
He is free to choose some one else."

"Then I have fulfilled my commission thoroughly," said Mr. Farebrother,
putting out his hand to Mary, "and I shall ride back to Middlemarch
forthwith.  With this prospect before him, we shall get Fred into the
right niche somehow, and I hope I shall live to join your hands.  God
bless you!"

"Oh, please stay, and let me give you some tea," said Mary.  Her eyes
filled with tears, for something indefinable, something like the
resolute suppression of a pain in Mr. Farebrother's manner, made her
feel suddenly miserable, as she had once felt when she saw her father's
hands trembling in a moment of trouble.

"No, my dear, no.  I must get back."

In three minutes the Vicar was on horseback again, having gone
magnanimously through a duty much harder than the renunciation of
whist, or even than the writing of penitential meditations.



CHAPTER LIII.

    It is but a shallow haste which concludeth insincerity from
    what outsiders call inconsistency--putting a dead mechanism
    of "ifs" and "therefores" for the living myriad of hidden
    suckers whereby the belief and the conduct are wrought into
    mutual sustainment.


Mr. Bulstrode, when he was hoping to acquire a new interest in Lowick,
had naturally had an especial wish that the new clergyman should be one
whom he thoroughly approved; and he believed it to be a chastisement
and admonition directed to his own shortcomings and those of the nation
at large, that just about the time when he came in possession of the
deeds which made him the proprietor of Stone Court, Mr. Farebrother
"read himself" into the quaint little church and preached his first
sermon to the congregation of farmers, laborers, and village artisans.
It was not that Mr. Bulstrode intended to frequent Lowick Church or to
reside at Stone Court for a good while to come: he had bought the
excellent farm and fine homestead simply as a retreat which he might
gradually enlarge as to the land and beautify as to the dwelling, until
it should be conducive to the divine glory that he should enter on it
as a residence, partially withdrawing from his present exertions in the
administration of business, and throwing more conspicuously on the side
of Gospel truth the weight of local landed proprietorship, which
Providence might increase by unforeseen occasions of purchase.  A
strong leading in this direction seemed to have been given in the
surprising facility of getting Stone Court, when every one had expected
that Mr. Rigg Featherstone would have clung to it as the Garden of
Eden.  That was what poor old Peter himself had expected; having often,
in imagination, looked up through the sods above him, and, unobstructed
by perspective, seen his frog-faced legatee enjoying the fine old
place to the perpetual surprise and disappointment of other survivors.

But how little we know what would make paradise for our neighbors!  We
judge from our own desires, and our neighbors themselves are not always
open enough even to throw out a hint of theirs.  The cool and judicious
Joshua Rigg had not allowed his parent to perceive that Stone Court was
anything less than the chief good in his estimation, and he had
certainly wished to call it his own.  But as Warren Hastings looked at
gold and thought of buying Daylesford, so Joshua Rigg looked at Stone
Court and thought of buying gold.  He had a very distinct and intense
vision of his chief good, the vigorous greed which he had inherited
having taken a special form by dint of circumstance: and his chief good
was to be a moneychanger.  From his earliest employment as an
errand-boy in a seaport, he had looked through the windows of the
moneychangers as other boys look through the windows of the
pastry-cooks; the fascination had wrought itself gradually into a deep
special passion; he meant, when he had property, to do many things, one
of them being to marry a genteel young person; but these were all
accidents and joys that imagination could dispense with.  The one joy
after which his soul thirsted was to have a money-changer's shop on a
much-frequented quay, to have locks all round him of which he held the
keys, and to look sublimely cool as he handled the breeding coins of
all nations, while helpless Cupidity looked at him enviously from the
other side of an iron lattice.  The strength of that passion had been a
power enabling him to master all the knowledge necessary to gratify it.
And when others were thinking that he had settled at Stone Court for
life, Joshua himself was thinking that the moment now was not far off
when he should settle on the North Quay with the best appointments in
safes and locks.

Enough.  We are concerned with looking at Joshua Rigg's sale of his
land from Mr. Bulstrode's point of view, and he interpreted it as a
cheering dispensation conveying perhaps a sanction to a purpose which
he had for some time entertained without external encouragement; he
interpreted it thus, but not too confidently, offering up his
thanksgiving in guarded phraseology.  His doubts did not arise from the
possible relations of the event to Joshua Rigg's destiny, which
belonged to the unmapped regions not taken under the providential
government, except perhaps in an imperfect colonial way; but they arose
from reflecting that this dispensation too might be a chastisement for
himself, as Mr. Farebrother's induction to the living clearly was.

This was not what Mr. Bulstrode said to any man for the sake of
deceiving him: it was what he said to himself--it was as genuinely his
mode of explaining events as any theory of yours may be, if you happen
to disagree with him.  For the egoism which enters into our theories
does not affect their sincerity; rather, the more our egoism is
satisfied, the more robust is our belief.

However, whether for sanction or for chastisement, Mr. Bulstrode,
hardly fifteen months after the death of Peter Featherstone, had become
the proprietor of Stone Court, and what Peter would say "if he were
worthy to know," had become an inexhaustible and consolatory subject of
conversation to his disappointed relatives.  The tables were now turned
on that dear brother departed, and to contemplate the frustration of
his cunning by the superior cunning of things in general was a cud of
delight to Solomon.  Mrs. Waule had a melancholy triumph in the proof
that it did not answer to make false Featherstones and cut off the
genuine; and Sister Martha receiving the news in the Chalky Flats said,
"Dear, dear! then the Almighty could have been none so pleased with the
almshouses after all."

Affectionate Mrs. Bulstrode was particularly glad of the advantage
which her husband's health was likely to get from the purchase of Stone
Court.  Few days passed without his riding thither and looking over
some part of the farm with the bailiff, and the evenings were delicious
in that quiet spot, when the new hay-ricks lately set up were sending
forth odors to mingle with the breath of the rich old garden.  One
evening, while the sun was still above the horizon and burning in
golden lamps among the great walnut boughs, Mr. Bulstrode was pausing
on horseback outside the front gate waiting for Caleb Garth, who had
met him by appointment to give an opinion on a question of stable
drainage, and was now advising the bailiff in the rick-yard.

Mr. Bulstrode was conscious of being in a good spiritual frame and more
than usually serene, under the influence of his innocent recreation.
He was doctrinally convinced that there was a total absence of merit in
himself; but that doctrinal conviction may be held without pain when
the sense of demerit does not take a distinct shape in memory and
revive the tingling of shame or the pang of remorse.  Nay, it may be
held with intense satisfaction when the depth of our sinning is but a
measure for the depth of forgiveness, and a clenching proof that we are
peculiar instruments of the divine intention.  The memory has as many
moods as the temper, and shifts its scenery like a diorama.  At this
moment Mr. Bulstrode felt as if the sunshine were all one with that of
far-off evenings when he was a very young man and used to go out
preaching beyond Highbury.  And he would willingly have had that
service of exhortation in prospect now.  The texts were there still,
and so was his own facility in expounding them.  His brief reverie was
interrupted by the return of Caleb Garth, who also was on horseback,
and was just shaking his bridle before starting, when he exclaimed--

"Bless my heart! what's this fellow in black coming along the lane?
He's like one of those men one sees about after the races."

Mr. Bulstrode turned his horse and looked along the lane, but made no
reply.  The comer was our slight acquaintance Mr. Raffles, whose
appearance presented no other change than such as was due to a suit of
black and a crape hat-band. He was within three yards of the horseman
now, and they could see the flash of recognition in his face as he
whirled his stick upward, looking all the while at Mr. Bulstrode, and
at last exclaiming:--

"By Jove, Nick, it's you!  I couldn't be mistaken, though the
five-and-twenty years have played old Boguy with us both!  How are you,
eh? you didn't expect to see _me_ here.  Come, shake us by the hand."
To say that Mr. Raffles' manner was rather excited would be only one
mode of saying that it was evening.  Caleb Garth could see that there
was a moment of struggle and hesitation in Mr. Bulstrode, but it ended
in his putting out his hand coldly to Raffles and saying--

"I did not indeed expect to see you in this remote country place."

"Well, it belongs to a stepson of mine," said Raffles, adjusting
himself in a swaggering attitude.  "I came to see him here before.  I'm
not so surprised at seeing you, old fellow, because I picked up a
letter--what you may call a providential thing.  It's uncommonly
fortunate I met you, though; for I don't care about seeing my stepson:
he's not affectionate, and his poor mother's gone now.  To tell the
truth, I came out of love to you, Nick: I came to get your address,
for--look here!"  Raffles drew a crumpled paper from his pocket.

Almost any other man than Caleb Garth might have been tempted to linger
on the spot for the sake of hearing all he could about a man whose
acquaintance with Bulstrode seemed to imply passages in the banker's
life so unlike anything that was known of him in Middlemarch that they
must have the nature of a secret to pique curiosity.  But Caleb was
peculiar: certain human tendencies which are commonly strong were
almost absent from his mind; and one of these was curiosity about
personal affairs.  Especially if there was anything discreditable to be
found out concerning another man, Caleb preferred not to know it; and
if he had to tell anybody under him that his evil doings were
discovered, he was more embarrassed than the culprit.  He now spurred
his horse, and saying, "I wish you good evening, Mr. Bulstrode; I must
be getting home," set off at a trot.

"You didn't put your full address to this letter," Raffles continued.
"That was not like the first-rate man of business you used to be.  'The
Shrubs,'--they may be anywhere: you live near at hand, eh?--have cut
the London concern altogether--perhaps turned country squire--have a
rural mansion to invite me to.  Lord, how many years it is ago!  The
old lady must have been dead a pretty long while--gone to glory without
the pain of knowing how poor her daughter was, eh?  But, by Jove!
you're very pale and pasty, Nick.  Come, if you're going home, I'll
walk by your side."

Mr. Bulstrode's usual paleness had in fact taken an almost deathly hue.
Five minutes before, the expanse of his life had been submerged in its
evening sunshine which shone backward to its remembered morning: sin
seemed to be a question of doctrine and inward penitence, humiliation
an exercise of the closet, the bearing of his deeds a matter of private
vision adjusted solely by spiritual relations and conceptions of the
divine purposes.  And now, as if by some hideous magic, this loud red
figure had risen before him in unmanageable solidity--an incorporate
past which had not entered into his imagination of chastisements.  But
Mr. Bulstrode's thought was busy, and he was not a man to act or speak
rashly.

"I was going home," he said, "but I can defer my ride a little.  And
you can, if you please, rest here."

"Thank you," said Raffles, making a grimace.  "I don't care now about
seeing my stepson.  I'd rather go home with you."

"Your stepson, if Mr. Rigg Featherstone was he, is here no longer.  I
am master here now."

Raffles opened wide eyes, and gave a long whistle of surprise, before
he said, "Well then, I've no objection.  I've had enough walking from
the coach-road. I never was much of a walker, or rider either.  What I
like is a smart vehicle and a spirited cob.  I was always a little
heavy in the saddle.  What a pleasant surprise it must be to you to see
me, old fellow!" he continued, as they turned towards the house.  "You
don't say so; but you never took your luck heartily--you were always
thinking of improving the occasion--you'd such a gift for improving
your luck."

Mr. Raffles seemed greatly to enjoy his own wit, and swung his leg in a
swaggering manner which was rather too much for his companion's
judicious patience.

"If I remember rightly," Mr. Bulstrode observed, with chill anger, "our
acquaintance many years ago had not the sort of intimacy which you are
now assuming, Mr. Raffles.  Any services you desire of me will be the
more readily rendered if you will avoid a tone of familiarity which did
not lie in our former intercourse, and can hardly be warranted by more
than twenty years of separation."

"You don't like being called Nick?  Why, I always called you Nick in my
heart, and though lost to sight, to memory dear.  By Jove! my feelings
have ripened for you like fine old cognac.  I hope you've got some in
the house now.  Josh filled my flask well the last time."

Mr. Bulstrode had not yet fully learned that even the desire for cognac
was not stronger in Raffles than the desire to torment, and that a hint
of annoyance always served him as a fresh cue.  But it was at least
clear that further objection was useless, and Mr. Bulstrode, in giving
orders to the housekeeper for the accommodation of the guest, had a
resolute air of quietude.

There was the comfort of thinking that this housekeeper had been in the
service of Rigg also, and might accept the idea that Mr. Bulstrode
entertained Raffles merely as a friend of her former master.

When there was food and drink spread before his visitor in the
wainscoted parlor, and no witness in the room, Mr. Bulstrode said--

"Your habits and mine are so different, Mr. Raffles, that we can hardly
enjoy each other's society.  The wisest plan for both of us will
therefore be to part as soon as possible.  Since you say that you
wished to meet me, you probably considered that you had some business
to transact with me.  But under the circumstances I will invite you to
remain here for the night, and I will myself ride over here early
to-morrow morning--before breakfast, in fact, when I can receive any
Communication you have to make to me."

"With all my heart," said Raffles; "this is a comfortable place--a
little dull for a continuance; but I can put up with it for a night,
with this good liquor and the prospect of seeing you again in the
morning.  You're a much better host than my stepson was; but Josh owed
me a bit of a grudge for marrying his mother; and between you and me
there was never anything but kindness."

Mr. Bulstrode, hoping that the peculiar mixture of joviality and
sneering in Raffles' manner was a good deal the effect of drink, had
determined to wait till he was quite sober before he spent more words
upon him.  But he rode home with a terribly lucid vision of the
difficulty there would be in arranging any result that could be
permanently counted on with this man.  It was inevitable that he should
wish to get rid of John Raffles, though his reappearance could not be
regarded as lying outside the divine plan.  The spirit of evil might
have sent him to threaten Mr. Bulstrode's subversion as an instrument
of good; but the threat must have been permitted, and was a
chastisement of a new kind.  It was an hour of anguish for him very
different from the hours in which his struggle had been securely
private, and which had ended with a sense that his secret misdeeds were
pardoned and his services accepted.  Those misdeeds even when
committed--had they not been half sanctified by the singleness of his
desire to devote himself and all he possessed to the furtherance of the
divine scheme?  And was he after all to become a mere stone of
stumbling and a rock of offence?  For who would understand the work
within him?  Who would not, when there was the pretext of casting
disgrace upon him, confound his whole life and the truths he had
espoused, in one heap of obloquy?

In his closest meditations the life-long habit of Mr. Bulstrode's mind
clad his most egoistic terrors in doctrinal references to superhuman
ends.  But even while we are talking and meditating about the earth's
orbit and the solar system, what we feel and adjust our movements to is
the stable earth and the changing day.  And now within all the
automatic succession of theoretic phrases--distinct and inmost as the
shiver and the ache of oncoming fever when we are discussing abstract
pain, was the forecast of disgrace in the presence of his neighbors and
of his own wife.  For the pain, as well as the public estimate of
disgrace, depends on the amount of previous profession.  To men who
only aim at escaping felony, nothing short of the prisoner's dock is
disgrace.  But Mr. Bulstrode had aimed at being an eminent Christian.

It was not more than half-past seven in the morning when he again
reached Stone Court.  The fine old place never looked more like a
delightful home than at that moment; the great white lilies were in
flower, the nasturtiums, their pretty leaves all silvered with dew,
were running away over the low stone wall; the very noises all around
had a heart of peace within them.  But everything was spoiled for the
owner as he walked on the gravel in front and awaited the descent of
Mr. Raffles, with whom he was condemned to breakfast.

It was not long before they were seated together in the wainscoted
parlor over their tea and toast, which was as much as Raffles cared to
take at that early hour.  The difference between his morning and
evening self was not so great as his companion had imagined that it
might be; the delight in tormenting was perhaps even the stronger
because his spirits were rather less highly pitched.  Certainly his
manners seemed more disagreeable by the morning light.

"As I have little time to spare, Mr. Raffles," said the banker, who
could hardly do more than sip his tea and break his toast without
eating it, "I shall be obliged if you will mention at once the ground
on which you wished to meet with me.  I presume that you have a home
elsewhere and will be glad to return to it."

"Why, if a man has got any heart, doesn't he want to see an old friend,
Nick?--I must call you Nick--we always did call you young Nick when we
knew you meant to marry the old widow.  Some said you had a handsome
family likeness to old Nick, but that was your mother's fault, calling
you Nicholas.  Aren't you glad to see me again?  I expected an invite
to stay with you at some pretty place.  My own establishment is broken
up now my wife's dead.  I've no particular attachment to any spot; I
would as soon settle hereabout as anywhere."

"May I ask why you returned from America?  I considered that the strong
wish you expressed to go there, when an adequate sum was furnished, was
tantamount to an engagement that you would remain there for life."

"Never knew that a wish to go to a place was the same thing as a wish
to stay.  But I did stay a matter of ten years; it didn't suit me to
stay any longer.  And I'm not going again, Nick." Here Mr. Raffles
winked slowly as he looked at Mr. Bulstrode.

"Do you wish to be settled in any business?  What is your calling now?"

"Thank you, my calling is to enjoy myself as much as I can.  I don't
care about working any more.  If I did anything it would be a little
travelling in the tobacco line--or something of that sort, which takes
a man into agreeable company.  But not without an independence to fall
back upon.  That's what I want: I'm not so strong as I was, Nick,
though I've got more color than you.  I want an independence."

"That could be supplied to you, if you would engage to keep at a
distance," said Mr. Bulstrode, perhaps with a little too much eagerness
in his undertone.

"That must be as it suits my convenience," said Raffles coolly.  "I see
no reason why I shouldn't make a few acquaintances hereabout.  I'm not
ashamed of myself as company for anybody.  I dropped my portmanteau at
the turnpike when I got down--change of linen--genuine--honor bright--more
than fronts and wristbands; and with this suit of mourning, straps
and everything, I should do you credit among the nobs here."  Mr.
Raffles had pushed away his chair and looked down at himself,
particularly at his straps.  His chief intention was to annoy
Bulstrode, but he really thought that his appearance now would produce
a good effect, and that he was not only handsome and witty, but clad in
a mourning style which implied solid connections.

"If you intend to rely on me in any way, Mr. Raffles," said Bulstrode,
after a moment's pause, "you will expect to meet my wishes."

"Ah, to be sure," said Raffles, with a mocking cordiality.  "Didn't I
always do it?  Lord, you made a pretty thing out of me, and I got but
little.  I've often thought since, I might have done better by telling
the old woman that I'd found her daughter and her grandchild: it would
have suited my feelings better; I've got a soft place in my heart.  But
you've buried the old lady by this time, I suppose--it's all one to her
now.  And you've got your fortune out of that profitable business which
had such a blessing on it.  You've taken to being a nob, buying land,
being a country bashaw.  Still in the Dissenting line, eh?  Still
godly?  Or taken to the Church as more genteel?"

This time Mr. Raffles' slow wink and slight protrusion of his tongue
was worse than a nightmare, because it held the certitude that it was
not a nightmare, but a waking misery.  Mr. Bulstrode felt a shuddering
nausea, and did not speak, but was considering diligently whether he
should not leave Raffles to do as he would, and simply defy him as a
slanderer.  The man would soon show himself disreputable enough to make
people disbelieve him.  "But not when he tells any ugly-looking truth
about _you_," said discerning consciousness.  And again: it seemed no
wrong to keep Raffles at a distance, but Mr. Bulstrode shrank from the
direct falsehood of denying true statements.  It was one thing to look
back on forgiven sins, nay, to explain questionable conformity to lax
customs, and another to enter deliberately on the necessity of
falsehood.

But since Bulstrode did not speak, Raffles ran on, by way of using time
to the utmost.

"I've not had such fine luck as you, by Jove!  Things went confoundedly
with me in New York; those Yankees are cool hands, and a man of
gentlemanly feelings has no chance with them.  I married when I came
back--a nice woman in the tobacco trade--very fond of me--but the
trade was restricted, as we say.  She had been settled there a good
many years by a friend; but there was a son too much in the case.  Josh
and I never hit it off.  However, I made the most of the position, and
I've always taken my glass in good company.  It's been all on the
square with me; I'm as open as the day.  You won't take it ill of me
that I didn't look you up before.  I've got a complaint that makes me a
little dilatory.  I thought you were trading and praying away in London
still, and didn't find you there.  But you see I was sent to you,
Nick--perhaps for a blessing to both of us."

Mr. Raffles ended with a jocose snuffle: no man felt his intellect more
superior to religious cant.  And if the cunning which calculates on the
meanest feelings in men could be called intellect, he had his share,
for under the blurting rallying tone with which he spoke to Bulstrode,
there was an evident selection of statements, as if they had been so
many moves at chess.  Meanwhile Bulstrode had determined on his move,
and he said, with gathered resolution--

"You will do well to reflect, Mr. Raffles, that it is possible for a
man to overreach himself in the effort to secure undue advantage.
Although I am not in any way bound to you, I am willing to supply you
with a regular annuity--in quarterly payments--so long as you fulfil a
promise to remain at a distance from this neighborhood.  It is in your
power to choose.  If you insist on remaining here, even for a short
time, you will get nothing from me.  I shall decline to know you."

"Ha, ha!" said Raffles, with an affected explosion, "that reminds me of
a droll dog of a thief who declined to know the constable."

"Your allusions are lost on me sir," said Bulstrode, with white heat;
"the law has no hold on me either through your agency or any other."

"You can't understand a joke, my good fellow.  I only meant that I
should never decline to know you.  But let us be serious.  Your
quarterly payment won't quite suit me.  I like my freedom."

Here Raffles rose and stalked once or twice up and down the room,
swinging his leg, and assuming an air of masterly meditation.  At last
he stopped opposite Bulstrode, and said, "I'll tell you what!  Give us
a couple of hundreds--come, that's modest--and I'll go away--honor
bright!--pick up my portmanteau and go away.  But I shall not give up
my Liberty for a dirty annuity.  I shall come and go where I like.
Perhaps it may suit me to stay away, and correspond with a friend;
perhaps not.  Have you the money with you?"

"No, I have one hundred," said Bulstrode, feeling the immediate
riddance too great a relief to be rejected on the ground of future
uncertainties.  "I will forward you the other if you will mention an
address."

"No, I'll wait here till you bring it," said Raffles.  "I'll take a
stroll and have a snack, and you'll be back by that time."

Mr. Bulstrode's sickly body, shattered by the agitations he had gone
through since the last evening, made him feel abjectly in the power of
this loud invulnerable man.  At that moment he snatched at a temporary
repose to be won on any terms.  He was rising to do what Raffles
suggested, when the latter said, lifting up his finger as if with a
sudden recollection--

"I did have another look after Sarah again, though I didn't tell you;
I'd a tender conscience about that pretty young woman.  I didn't find
her, but I found out her husband's name, and I made a note of it.  But
hang it, I lost my pocketbook.  However, if I heard it, I should know
it again.  I've got my faculties as if I was in my prime, but names
wear out, by Jove!  Sometimes I'm no better than a confounded tax-paper
before the names are filled in.  However, if I hear of her and her
family, you shall know, Nick.  You'd like to do something for her, now
she's your step-daughter."

"Doubtless," said Mr. Bulstrode, with the usual steady look of his
light-gray eyes; "though that might reduce my power of assisting you."

As he walked out of the room, Raffles winked slowly at his back, and
then turned towards the window to watch the banker riding away--virtually
at his command.  His lips first curled with a smile and then opened
with a short triumphant laugh.

"But what the deuce was the name?" he presently said, half aloud,
scratching his head, and wrinkling his brows horizontally.  He had not
really cared or thought about this point of forgetfulness until it
occurred to him in his invention of annoyances for Bulstrode.

"It began with L; it was almost all l's I fancy," he went on, with a
sense that he was getting hold of the slippery name.  But the hold was
too slight, and he soon got tired of this mental chase; for few men
were more impatient of private occupation or more in need of making
themselves continually heard than Mr. Raffles.  He preferred using his
time in pleasant conversation with the bailiff and the housekeeper,
from whom he gathered as much as he wanted to know about Mr.
Bulstrode's position in Middlemarch.

After all, however, there was a dull space of time which needed
relieving with bread and cheese and ale, and when he was seated alone
with these resources in the wainscoted parlor, he suddenly slapped his
knee, and exclaimed, "Ladislaw!"  That action of memory which he had
tried to set going, and had abandoned in despair, had suddenly
completed itself without conscious effort--a common experience,
agreeable as a completed sneeze, even if the name remembered is of no
value.  Raffles immediately took out his pocket-book, and wrote down
the name, not because he expected to use it, but merely for the sake of
not being at a loss if he ever did happen to want it.  He was not going
to tell Bulstrode: there was no actual good in telling, and to a mind
like that of Mr. Raffles there is always probable good in a secret.

He was satisfied with his present success, and by three o'clock that
day he had taken up his portmanteau at the turnpike and mounted the
coach, relieving Mr. Bulstrode's eyes of an ugly black spot on the
landscape at Stone Court, but not relieving him of the dread that the
black spot might reappear and become inseparable even from the vision
of his hearth.





BOOK VI.





THE WIDOW AND THE WIFE.



CHAPTER LIV.

    "Negli occhi porta la mia donna Amore;
         Per che si fa gentil eio ch'ella mira:
         Ov'ella passa, ogni uom ver lei si gira,
         E cui saluta fa tremar lo core.

     Sicche, bassando il viso, tutto smore,
         E d'ogni suo difetto allor sospira:
         Fuggon dinanzi a lei Superbia ed Ira:
         Aiutatemi, donne, a farle onore.

     Ogni dolcezza, ogni pensiero umile
         Nasce nel core a chi parlar la sente;
         Ond'e beato chi prima la vide.
     Quel ch'ella par quand' un poco sorride,
         Non si puo dicer, ne tener a mente,
         Si e nuovo miracolo gentile."
                        --DANTE: la Vita Nuova.


By that delightful morning when the hay-ricks at Stone Court were
scenting the air quite impartially, as if Mr. Raffles had been a guest
worthy of finest incense, Dorothea had again taken up her abode at
Lowick Manor.  After three months Freshitt had become rather
oppressive: to sit like a model for Saint Catherine looking rapturously
at Celia's baby would not do for many hours in the day, and to remain
in that momentous babe's presence with persistent disregard was a
course that could not have been tolerated in a childless sister.
Dorothea would have been capable of carrying baby joyfully for a mile
if there had been need, and of loving it the more tenderly for that
labor; but to an aunt who does not recognize her infant nephew as
Bouddha, and has nothing to do for him but to admire, his behavior is
apt to appear monotonous, and the interest of watching him exhaustible.
This possibility was quite hidden from Celia, who felt that Dorothea's
childless widowhood fell in quite prettily with the birth of little
Arthur (baby was named after Mr. Brooke).

"Dodo is just the creature not to mind about having anything of her
own--children or anything!" said Celia to her husband.  "And if she
had had a baby, it never could have been such a dear as Arthur.  Could
it, James?

"Not if it had been like Casaubon," said Sir James, conscious of some
indirectness in his answer, and of holding a strictly private opinion
as to the perfections of his first-born.

"No! just imagine!  Really it was a mercy," said Celia; "and I think it
is very nice for Dodo to be a widow.  She can be just as fond of our
baby as if it were her own, and she can have as many notions of her own
as she likes."

"It is a pity she was not a queen," said the devout Sir James.

"But what should we have been then?  We must have been something else,"
said Celia, objecting to so laborious a flight of imagination.  "I like
her better as she is."

Hence, when she found that Dorothea was making arrangements for her
final departure to Lowick, Celia raised her eyebrows with
disappointment, and in her quiet unemphatic way shot a needle-arrow of
sarcasm.

"What will you do at Lowick, Dodo?  You say yourself there is nothing
to be done there: everybody is so clean and well off, it makes you
quite melancholy.  And here you have been so happy going all about
Tipton with Mr. Garth into the worst backyards.  And now uncle is
abroad, you and Mr. Garth can have it all your own way; and I am sure
James does everything you tell him."

"I shall often come here, and I shall see how baby grows all the
better," said Dorothea.

"But you will never see him washed," said Celia; "and that is quite the
best part of the day."  She was almost pouting: it did seem to her very
hard in Dodo to go away from the baby when she might stay.

"Dear Kitty, I will come and stay all night on purpose," said Dorothea;
"but I want to be alone now, and in my own home.  I wish to know the
Farebrothers better, and to talk to Mr. Farebrother about what there is
to be done in Middlemarch."

Dorothea's native strength of will was no longer all converted into
resolute submission.  She had a great yearning to be at Lowick, and was
simply determined to go, not feeling bound to tell all her reasons.
But every one around her disapproved.  Sir James was much pained, and
offered that they should all migrate to Cheltenham for a few months
with the sacred ark, otherwise called a cradle: at that period a man
could hardly know what to propose if Cheltenham were rejected.

The Dowager Lady Chettam, just returned from a visit to her daughter in
town, wished, at least, that Mrs. Vigo should be written to, and
invited to accept the office of companion to Mrs. Casaubon: it was not
credible that Dorothea as a young widow would think of living alone in
the house at Lowick.  Mrs. Vigo had been reader and secretary to royal
personages, and in point of knowledge and sentiments even Dorothea
could have nothing to object to her.

Mrs. Cadwallader said, privately, "You will certainly go mad in that
house alone, my dear.  You will see visions.  We have all got to exert
ourselves a little to keep sane, and call things by the same names as
other people call them by.  To be sure, for younger sons and women who
have no money, it is a sort of provision to go mad: they are taken care
of then.  But you must not run into that.  I dare say you are a little
bored here with our good dowager; but think what a bore you might
become yourself to your fellow-creatures if you were always playing
tragedy queen and taking things sublimely.  Sitting alone in that
library at Lowick you may fancy yourself ruling the weather; you must
get a few people round you who wouldn't believe you if you told them.
That is a good lowering medicine."

"I never called everything by the same name that all the people about
me did," said Dorothea, stoutly.

"But I suppose you have found out your mistake, my dear," said Mrs.
Cadwallader, "and that is a proof of sanity."

Dorothea was aware of the sting, but it did not hurt her.  "No," she
said, "I still think that the greater part of the world is mistaken
about many things.  Surely one may be sane and yet think so, since the
greater part of the world has often had to come round from its opinion."

Mrs. Cadwallader said no more on that point to Dorothea, but to her
husband she remarked, "It will be well for her to marry again as soon
as it is proper, if one could get her among the right people.  Of
course the Chettams would not wish it.  But I see clearly a husband is
the best thing to keep her in order.  If we were not so poor I would
invite Lord Triton.  He will be marquis some day, and there is no
denying that she would make a good marchioness: she looks handsomer
than ever in her mourning."

"My dear Elinor, do let the poor woman alone.  Such contrivances are of
no use," said the easy Rector.

"No use?  How are matches made, except by bringing men and women
together?  And it is a shame that her uncle should have run away and
shut up the Grange just now.  There ought to be plenty of eligible
matches invited to Freshitt and the Grange.  Lord Triton is precisely
the man: full of plans for making the people happy in a soft-headed
sort of way.  That would just suit Mrs. Casaubon."

"Let Mrs. Casaubon choose for herself, Elinor."

"That is the nonsense you wise men talk!  How can she choose if she has
no variety to choose from?  A woman's choice usually means taking the
only man she can get.  Mark my words, Humphrey.  If her friends don't
exert themselves, there will be a worse business than the Casaubon
business yet."

"For heaven's sake don't touch on that topic, Elinor! It is a very sore
point with Sir James. He would be deeply offended if you entered on it
to him unnecessarily."

"I have never entered on it," said Mrs Cadwallader, opening her hands.
"Celia told me all about the will at the beginning, without any asking
of mine."

"Yes, yes; but they want the thing hushed up, and I understand that the
young fellow is going out of the neighborhood."

Mrs. Cadwallader said nothing, but gave her husband three significant
nods, with a very sarcastic expression in her dark eyes.

Dorothea quietly persisted in spite of remonstrance and persuasion.  So
by the end of June the shutters were all opened at Lowick Manor, and
the morning gazed calmly into the library, shining on the rows of
note-books as it shines on the weary waste planted with huge stones,
the mute memorial of a forgotten faith; and the evening laden with
roses entered silently into the blue-green boudoir where Dorothea chose
oftenest to sit.  At first she walked into every room, questioning the
eighteen months of her married life, and carrying on her thoughts as if
they were a speech to be heard by her husband.  Then, she lingered in
the library and could not be at rest till she had carefully ranged all
the note-books as she imagined that he would wish to see them, in
orderly sequence.  The pity which had been the restraining compelling
motive in her life with him still clung about his image, even while she
remonstrated with him in indignant thought and told him that he was
unjust.  One little act of hers may perhaps be smiled at as
superstitious.  The Synoptical Tabulation for the use of Mrs. Casaubon,
she carefully enclosed and sealed, writing within the envelope, "I
could not use it.  Do you not see now that I could not submit my soul
to yours, by working hopelessly at what I have no belief in--Dorothea?"
Then she deposited the paper in her own desk.

That silent colloquy was perhaps only the more earnest because
underneath and through it all there was always the deep longing which
had really determined her to come to Lowick.  The longing was to see
Will Ladislaw.  She did not know any good that could come of their
meeting: she was helpless; her hands had been tied from making up to
him for any unfairness in his lot.  But her soul thirsted to see him.
How could it be otherwise?  If a princess in the days of enchantment
had seen a four-footed creature from among those which live in herds
come to her once and again with a human gaze which rested upon her with
choice and beseeching, what would she think of in her journeying, what
would she look for when the herds passed her?  Surely for the gaze
which had found her, and which she would know again.  Life would be no
better than candle-light tinsel and daylight rubbish if our spirits
were not touched by what has been, to issues of longing and constancy.
It was true that Dorothea wanted to know the Farebrothers better, and
especially to talk to the new rector, but also true that remembering
what Lydgate had told her about Will Ladislaw and little Miss Noble,
she counted on Will's coming to Lowick to see the Farebrother family.
The very first Sunday, _before_ she entered the church, she saw him as
she had seen him the last time she was there, alone in the clergyman's
pew; but _when_ she entered his figure was gone.

In the week-days when she went to see the ladies at the Rectory, she
listened in vain for some word that they might let fall about Will; but
it seemed to her that Mrs. Farebrother talked of every one else in the
neighborhood and out of it.

"Probably some of Mr. Farebrother's Middlemarch hearers may follow him
to Lowick sometimes.  Do you not think so?" said Dorothea, rather
despising herself for having a secret motive in asking the question.

"If they are wise they will, Mrs. Casaubon," said the old lady.  "I see
that you set a right value on my son's preaching.  His grandfather on
my side was an excellent clergyman, but his father was in the law:--most
exemplary and honest nevertheless, which is a reason for our never
being rich.  They say Fortune is a woman and capricious.  But sometimes
she is a good woman and gives to those who merit, which has been the
case with you, Mrs. Casaubon, who have given a living to my son."

Mrs. Farebrother recurred to her knitting with a dignified satisfaction
in her neat little effort at oratory, but this was not what Dorothea
wanted to hear.  Poor thing! she did not even know whether Will
Ladislaw was still at Middlemarch, and there was no one whom she dared
to ask, unless it were Lydgate.  But just now she could not see Lydgate
without sending for him or going to seek him.  Perhaps Will Ladislaw,
having heard of that strange ban against him left by Mr. Casaubon, had
felt it better that he and she should not meet again, and perhaps she
was wrong to wish for a meeting that others might find many good
reasons against.  Still "I do wish it" came at the end of those wise
reflections as naturally as a sob after holding the breath.  And the
meeting did happen, but in a formal way quite unexpected by her.

One morning, about eleven, Dorothea was seated in her boudoir with a
map of the land attached to the manor and other papers before her,
which were to help her in making an exact statement for herself of her
income and affairs.  She had not yet applied herself to her work, but
was seated with her hands folded on her lap, looking out along the
avenue of limes to the distant fields.  Every leaf was at rest in the
sunshine, the familiar scene was changeless, and seemed to represent
the prospect of her life, full of motiveless ease--motiveless, if her
own energy could not seek out reasons for ardent action.  The widow's
cap of those times made an oval frame for the face, and had a crown
standing up; the dress was an experiment in the utmost laying on of
crape; but this heavy solemnity of clothing made her face look all the
younger, with its recovered bloom, and the sweet, inquiring candor of
her eyes.

Her reverie was broken by Tantripp, who came to say that Mr. Ladislaw
was below, and begged permission to see Madam if it were not too early.

"I will see him," said Dorothea, rising immediately.  "Let him be shown
into the drawing-room."

The drawing-room was the most neutral room in the house to her--the
one least associated with the trials of her married life: the damask
matched the wood-work, which was all white and gold; there were two
tall mirrors and tables with nothing on them--in brief, it was a room
where you had no reason for sitting in one place rather than in
another.  It was below the boudoir, and had also a bow-window looking
out on the avenue.  But when Pratt showed Will Ladislaw into it the
window was open; and a winged visitor, buzzing in and out now and then
without minding the furniture, made the room look less formal and
uninhabited.

"Glad to see you here again, sir," said Pratt, lingering to adjust a
blind.

"I am only come to say good-by, Pratt," said Will, who wished even the
butler to know that he was too proud to hang about Mrs. Casaubon now
she was a rich widow.

"Very sorry to hear it, sir," said Pratt, retiring.  Of course, as a
servant who was to be told nothing, he knew the fact of which Ladislaw
was still ignorant, and had drawn his inferences; indeed, had not
differed from his betrothed Tantripp when she said, "Your master was as
jealous as a fiend--and no reason.  Madam would look higher than Mr.
Ladislaw, else I don't know her.  Mrs. Cadwallader's maid says there's
a lord coming who is to marry her when the mourning's over."

There were not many moments for Will to walk about with his hat in his
hand before Dorothea entered.  The meeting was very different from that
first meeting in Rome when Will had been embarrassed and Dorothea calm.
This time he felt miserable but determined, while she was in a state of
agitation which could not be hidden.  Just outside the door she had
felt that this longed-for meeting was after all too difficult, and when
she saw Will advancing towards her, the deep blush which was rare in
her came with painful suddenness.  Neither of them knew how it was, but
neither of them spoke.  She gave her hand for a moment, and then they
went to sit down near the window, she on one settee and he on another
opposite.  Will was peculiarly uneasy: it seemed to him not like
Dorothea that the mere fact of her being a widow should cause such a
change in her manner of receiving him; and he knew of no other
condition which could have affected their previous relation to each
other--except that, as his imagination at once told him, her friends
might have been poisoning her mind with their suspicions of him.

"I hope I have not presumed too much in calling," said Will; "I could
not bear to leave the neighborhood and begin a new life without seeing
you to say good-by."

"Presumed?  Surely not.  I should have thought it unkind if you had not
wished to see me," said Dorothea, her habit of speaking with perfect
genuineness asserting itself through all her uncertainty and agitation.
"Are you going away immediately?"

"Very soon, I think.  I intend to go to town and eat my dinners as a
barrister, since, they say, that is the preparation for all public
business.  There will be a great deal of political work to be done
by-and-by, and I mean to try and do some of it.  Other men have managed
to win an honorable position for themselves without family or money."

"And that will make it all the more honorable," said Dorothea,
ardently.  "Besides, you have so many talents.  I have heard from my
uncle how well you speak in public, so that every one is sorry when you
leave off, and how clearly you can explain things.  And you care that
justice should be done to every one.  I am so glad.  When we were in
Rome, I thought you only cared for poetry and art, and the things that
adorn life for us who are well off.  But now I know you think about the
rest of the world."

While she was speaking Dorothea had lost her personal embarrassment,
and had become like her former self.  She looked at Will with a direct
glance, full of delighted confidence.

"You approve of my going away for years, then, and never coming here
again till I have made myself of some mark in the world?" said Will,
trying hard to reconcile the utmost pride with the utmost effort to get
an expression of strong feeling from Dorothea.

She was not aware how long it was before she answered.  She had turned
her head and was looking out of the window on the rose-bushes, which
seemed to have in them the summers of all the years when Will would be
away.  This was not judicious behavior.  But Dorothea never thought of
studying her manners: she thought only of bowing to a sad necessity
which divided her from Will.  Those first words of his about his
intentions had seemed to make everything clear to her: he knew, she
supposed, all about Mr. Casaubon's final conduct in relation to him,
and it had come to him with the same sort of shock as to herself.  He
had never felt more than friendship for her--had never had anything in
his mind to justify what she felt to be her husband's outrage on the
feelings of both: and that friendship he still felt.  Something which
may be called an inward silent sob had gone on in Dorothea before she
said with a pure voice, just trembling in the last words as if only
from its liquid flexibility--

"Yes, it must be right for you to do as you say.  I shall be very happy
when I hear that you have made your value felt.  But you must have
patience.  It will perhaps be a long while."

Will never quite knew how it was that he saved himself from falling
down at her feet, when the "long while" came forth with its gentle
tremor.  He used to say that the horrible hue and surface of her crape
dress was most likely the sufficient controlling force.  He sat still,
however, and only said--

"I shall never hear from you.  And you will forget all about me."

"No," said Dorothea, "I shall never forget you.  I have never forgotten
any one whom I once knew.  My life has never been crowded, and seems
not likely to be so.  And I have a great deal of space for memory at
Lowick, haven't I?"  She smiled.

"Good God!"  Will burst out passionately, rising, with his hat still in
his hand, and walking away to a marble table, where he suddenly turned
and leaned his back against it.  The blood had mounted to his face and
neck, and he looked almost angry.  It had seemed to him as if they were
like two creatures slowly turning to marble in each other's presence,
while their hearts were conscious and their eyes were yearning.  But
there was no help for it.  It should never be true of him that in this
meeting to which he had come with bitter resolution he had ended by a
confession which might be interpreted into asking for her fortune.
Moreover, it was actually true that he was fearful of the effect which
such confessions might have on Dorothea herself.

She looked at him from that distance in some trouble, imagining that
there might have been an offence in her words.  But all the while there
was a current of thought in her about his probable want of money, and
the impossibility of her helping him.  If her uncle had been at home,
something might have been done through him!  It was this preoccupation
with the hardship of Will's wanting money, while she had what ought to
have been his share, which led her to say, seeing that he remained
silent and looked away from her--

"I wonder whether you would like to have that miniature which hangs
up-stairs--I mean that beautiful miniature of your grandmother.  I
think it is not right for me to keep it, if you would wish to have it.
It is wonderfully like you."

"You are very good," said Will, irritably.  "No; I don't mind about it.
It is not very consoling to have one's own likeness.  It would be more
consoling if others wanted to have it."

"I thought you would like to cherish her memory--I thought--" Dorothea
broke off an instant, her imagination suddenly warning her away from
Aunt Julia's history--"you would surely like to have the miniature as a
family memorial."

"Why should I have that, when I have nothing else!  A man with only a
portmanteau for his stowage must keep his memorials in his head."

Will spoke at random: he was merely venting his petulance; it was a
little too exasperating to have his grandmother's portrait offered him
at that moment.  But to Dorothea's feeling his words had a peculiar
sting.  She rose and said with a touch of indignation as well as
hauteur--

"You are much the happier of us two, Mr. Ladislaw, to have nothing."

Will was startled.  Whatever the words might be, the tone seemed like a
dismissal; and quitting his leaning posture, he walked a little way
towards her.  Their eyes met, but with a strange questioning gravity.
Something was keeping their minds aloof, and each was left to
conjecture what was in the other.  Will had really never thought of
himself as having a claim of inheritance on the property which was held
by Dorothea, and would have required a narrative to make him understand
her present feeling.

"I never felt it a misfortune to have nothing till now," he said.  "But
poverty may be as bad as leprosy, if it divides us from what we most
care for."

The words cut Dorothea to the heart, and made her relent.  She answered
in a tone of sad fellowship.

"Sorrow comes in so many ways.  Two years ago I had no notion of
that--I mean of the unexpected way in which trouble comes, and ties our
hands, and makes us silent when we long to speak.  I used to despise
women a little for not shaping their lives more, and doing better
things.  I was very fond of doing as I liked, but I have almost given
it up," she ended, smiling playfully.

"I have not given up doing as I like, but I can very seldom do it,"
said Will.  He was standing two yards from her with his mind full of
contradictory desires and resolves--desiring some unmistakable proof
that she loved him, and yet dreading the position into which such a
proof might bring him.  "The thing one most longs for may be surrounded
with conditions that would be intolerable."

At this moment Pratt entered and said, "Sir James Chettam is in the
library, madam."

"Ask Sir James to come in here," said Dorothea, immediately.  It was as
if the same electric shock had passed through her and Will.  Each of
them felt proudly resistant, and neither looked at the other, while
they awaited Sir James's entrance.

After shaking hands with Dorothea, he bowed as slightly as possible to
Ladislaw, who repaid the slightness exactly, and then going towards
Dorothea, said--

"I must say good-by, Mrs. Casaubon; and probably for a long while."

Dorothea put out her hand and said her good-by cordially.  The sense
that Sir James was depreciating Will, and behaving rudely to him,
roused her resolution and dignity: there was no touch of confusion in
her manner.  And when Will had left the room, she looked with such calm
self-possession at Sir James, saying, "How is Celia?" that he was
obliged to behave as if nothing had annoyed him.  And what would be the
use of behaving otherwise?  Indeed, Sir James shrank with so much
dislike from the association even in thought of Dorothea with Ladislaw
as her possible lover, that he would himself have wished to avoid an
outward show of displeasure which would have recognized the
disagreeable possibility.  If any one had asked him why he shrank in
that way, I am not sure that he would at first have said anything
fuller or more precise than "_That_ Ladislaw!"--though on reflection
he might have urged that Mr. Casaubon's codicil, barring Dorothea's
marriage with Will, except under a penalty, was enough to cast
unfitness over any relation at all between them.  His aversion was all
the stronger because he felt himself unable to interfere.

But Sir James was a power in a way unguessed by himself.  Entering at
that moment, he was an incorporation of the strongest reasons through
which Will's pride became a repellent force, keeping him asunder from
Dorothea.



CHAPTER LV.

    Hath she her faults?  I would you had them too.
    They are the fruity must of soundest wine;
    Or say, they are regenerating fire
    Such as hath turned the dense black element
    Into a crystal pathway for the sun.


If youth is the season of hope, it is often so only in the sense that
our elders are hopeful about us; for no age is so apt as youth to think
its emotions, partings, and resolves are the last of their kind.  Each
crisis seems final, simply because it is new.  We are told that the
oldest inhabitants in Peru do not cease to be agitated by the
earthquakes, but they probably see beyond each shock, and reflect that
there are plenty more to come.

To Dorothea, still in that time of youth when the eyes with their long
full lashes look out after their rain of tears unsoiled and unwearied
as a freshly opened passion-flower, that morning's parting with Will
Ladislaw seemed to be the close of their personal relations.  He was
going away into the distance of unknown years, and if ever he came back
he would be another man.  The actual state of his mind--his proud
resolve to give the lie beforehand to any suspicion that he would play
the needy adventurer seeking a rich woman--lay quite out of her
imagination, and she had interpreted all his behavior easily enough by
her supposition that Mr. Casaubon's codicil seemed to him, as it did to
her, a gross and cruel interdict on any active friendship between them.
Their young delight in speaking to each other, and saying what no one
else would care to hear, was forever ended, and become a treasure of
the past.  For this very reason she dwelt on it without inward check.
That unique happiness too was dead, and in its shadowed silent chamber
she might vent the passionate grief which she herself wondered at.  For
the first time she took down the miniature from the wall and kept it
before her, liking to blend the woman who had been too hardly judged
with the grandson whom her own heart and judgment defended.  Can any
one who has rejoiced in woman's tenderness think it a reproach to her
that she took the little oval picture in her palm and made a bed for it
there, and leaned her cheek upon it, as if that would soothe the
creatures who had suffered unjust condemnation?  She did not know then
that it was Love who had come to her briefly, as in a dream before
awaking, with the hues of morning on his wings--that it was Love to
whom she was sobbing her farewell as his image was banished by the
blameless rigor of irresistible day.  She only felt that there was
something irrevocably amiss and lost in her lot, and her thoughts about
the future were the more readily shapen into resolve.  Ardent souls,
ready to construct their coming lives, are apt to commit themselves to
the fulfilment of their own visions.

One day that she went to Freshitt to fulfil her promise of staying all
night and seeing baby washed, Mrs. Cadwallader came to dine, the Rector
being gone on a fishing excursion.  It was a warm evening, and even in
the delightful drawing-room, where the fine old turf sloped from the
open window towards a lilied pool and well-planted mounds, the heat was
enough to make Celia in her white muslin and light curls reflect with
pity on what Dodo must feel in her black dress and close cap.  But this
was not until some episodes with baby were over, and had left her mind
at leisure.  She had seated herself and taken up a fan for some time
before she said, in her quiet guttural--

"Dear Dodo, do throw off that cap.  I am sure your dress must make you
feel ill."

"I am so used to the cap--it has become a sort of shell," said
Dorothea, smiling.  "I feel rather bare and exposed when it is off."

"I must see you without it; it makes us all warm," said Celia, throwing
down her fan, and going to Dorothea.  It was a pretty picture to see
this little lady in white muslin unfastening the widow's cap from her
more majestic sister, and tossing it on to a chair.  Just as the coils
and braids of dark-brown hair had been set free, Sir James entered the
room.  He looked at the released head, and said, "Ah!" in a tone of
satisfaction.

"It was I who did it, James," said Celia.  "Dodo need not make such a
slavery of her mourning; she need not wear that cap any more among her
friends."

"My dear Celia," said Lady Chettam, "a widow must wear her mourning at
least a year."

"Not if she marries again before the end of it," said Mrs. Cadwallader,
who had some pleasure in startling her good friend the Dowager.  Sir
James was annoyed, and leaned forward to play with Celia's Maltese dog.

"That is very rare, I hope," said Lady Chettam, in a tone intended to
guard against such events.  "No friend of ours ever committed herself
in that way except Mrs. Beevor, and it was very painful to Lord
Grinsell when she did so.  Her first husband was objectionable, which
made it the greater wonder.  And severely she was punished for it.
They said Captain Beevor dragged her about by the hair, and held up
loaded pistols at her."

"Oh, if she took the wrong man!" said Mrs. Cadwallader, who was in a
decidedly wicked mood.  "Marriage is always bad then, first or second.
Priority is a poor recommendation in a husband if he has got no other.
I would rather have a good second husband than an indifferent first."

"My dear, your clever tongue runs away with you," said Lady Chettam.
"I am sure you would be the last woman to marry again prematurely, if
our dear Rector were taken away."

"Oh, I make no vows; it might be a necessary economy.  It is lawful to
marry again, I suppose; else we might as well be Hindoos instead of
Christians.  Of course if a woman accepts the wrong man, she must take
the consequences, and one who does it twice over deserves her fate.
But if she can marry blood, beauty, and bravery--the sooner the
better."

"I think the subject of our conversation is very ill-chosen," said Sir
James, with a look of disgust.  "Suppose we change it."

"Not on my account, Sir James," said Dorothea, determined not to lose
the opportunity of freeing herself from certain oblique references to
excellent matches.  "If you are speaking on my behalf, I can assure you
that no question can be more indifferent and impersonal to me than
second marriage.  It is no more to me than if you talked of women going
fox-hunting: whether it is admirable in them or not, I shall not follow
them.  Pray let Mrs. Cadwallader amuse herself on that subject as much
as on any other."

"My dear Mrs. Casaubon," said Lady Chettam, in her stateliest way, "you
do not, I hope, think there was any allusion to you in my mentioning
Mrs. Beevor.  It was only an instance that occurred to me.  She was
step-daughter to Lord Grinsell: he married Mrs. Teveroy for his second
wife.  There could be no possible allusion to you."

"Oh no," said Celia.  "Nobody chose the subject; it all came out of
Dodo's cap.  Mrs. Cadwallader only said what was quite true.  A woman
could not be married in a widow's cap, James."

"Hush, my dear!" said Mrs. Cadwallader.  "I will not offend again.  I
will not even refer to Dido or Zenobia.  Only what are we to talk
about?  I, for my part, object to the discussion of Human Nature,
because that is the nature of rectors' wives."

Later in the evening, after Mrs. Cadwallader was gone, Celia said
privately to Dorothea, "Really, Dodo, taking your cap off made you like
yourself again in more ways than one.  You spoke up just as you used to
do, when anything was said to displease you.  But I could hardly make
out whether it was James that you thought wrong, or Mrs. Cadwallader."

"Neither," said Dorothea.  "James spoke out of delicacy to me, but he
was mistaken in supposing that I minded what Mrs. Cadwallader said.  I
should only mind if there were a law obliging me to take any piece of
blood and beauty that she or anybody else recommended."

"But you know, Dodo, if you ever did marry, it would be all the better
to have blood and beauty," said Celia, reflecting that Mr. Casaubon had
not been richly endowed with those gifts, and that it would be well to
caution Dorothea in time.

"Don't be anxious, Kitty; I have quite other thoughts about my life.  I
shall never marry again," said Dorothea, touching her sister's chin,
and looking at her with indulgent affection.  Celia was nursing her
baby, and Dorothea had come to say good-night to her.

"Really--quite?" said Celia.  "Not anybody at all--if he were very
wonderful indeed?"

Dorothea shook her head slowly.  "Not anybody at all.  I have
delightful plans.  I should like to take a great deal of land, and
drain it, and make a little colony, where everybody should work, and
all the work should be done well.  I should know every one of the
people and be their friend.  I am going to have great consultations
with Mr. Garth: he can tell me almost everything I want to know."

"Then you _will_ be happy, if you have a plan, Dodo?" said Celia.
"Perhaps little Arthur will like plans when he grows up, and then he
can help you."

Sir James was informed that same night that Dorothea was really quite
set against marrying anybody at all, and was going to take to "all
sorts of plans," just like what she used to have.  Sir James made no
remark.  To his secret feeling there was something repulsive in a
woman's second marriage, and no match would prevent him from feeling it
a sort of desecration for Dorothea.  He was aware that the world would
regard such a sentiment as preposterous, especially in relation to a
woman of one-and-twenty; the practice of "the world" being to treat of
a young widow's second marriage as certain and probably near, and to
smile with meaning if the widow acts accordingly.  But if Dorothea did
choose to espouse her solitude, he felt that the resolution would well
become her.



CHAPTER LVI.

    "How happy is he born and taught
     That serveth not another's will;
     Whose armor is his honest thought,
     And simple truth his only skill!
        .   .   .   .   .   .   .
     This man is freed from servile bands
     Of hope to rise or fear to fall;
     Lord of himself though not of lands;
     And having nothing yet hath all."
                             --SIR HENRY WOTTON.


Dorothea's confidence in Caleb Garth's knowledge, which had begun on
her hearing that he approved of her cottages, had grown fast during her
stay at Freshitt, Sir James having induced her to take rides over the
two estates in company with himself and Caleb, who quite returned her
admiration, and told his wife that Mrs. Casaubon had a head for
business most uncommon in a woman.  It must be remembered that by
"business" Caleb never meant money transactions, but the skilful
application of labor.

"Most uncommon!" repeated Caleb.  "She said a thing I often used to
think myself when I was a lad:--'Mr. Garth, I should like to feel, if I
lived to be old, that I had improved a great piece of land and built a
great many good cottages, because the work is of a healthy kind while
it is being done, and after it is done, men are the better for it.'
Those were the very words: she sees into things in that way."

"But womanly, I hope," said Mrs. Garth, half suspecting that Mrs.
Casaubon might not hold the true principle of subordination.

"Oh, you can't think!" said Caleb, shaking his head.  "You would like
to hear her speak, Susan.  She speaks in such plain words, and a voice
like music.  Bless me! it reminds me of bits in the 'Messiah'--'and
straightway there appeared a multitude of the heavenly host, praising
God and saying;' it has a tone with it that satisfies your ear."

Caleb was very fond of music, and when he could afford it went to hear
an oratorio that came within his reach, returning from it with a
profound reverence for this mighty structure of tones, which made him
sit meditatively, looking on the floor and throwing much unutterable
language into his outstretched hands.

With this good understanding between them, it was natural that Dorothea
asked Mr. Garth to undertake any business connected with the three
farms and the numerous tenements attached to Lowick Manor; indeed, his
expectation of getting work for two was being fast fulfilled.  As he
said, "Business breeds."  And one form of business which was beginning
to breed just then was the construction of railways.  A projected line
was to run through Lowick parish where the cattle had hitherto grazed
in a peace unbroken by astonishment; and thus it happened that the
infant struggles of the railway system entered into the affairs of
Caleb Garth, and determined the course of this history with regard to
two persons who were dear to him.  The submarine railway may have its
difficulties; but the bed of the sea is not divided among various
landed proprietors with claims for damages not only measurable but
sentimental.  In the hundred to which Middlemarch belonged railways
were as exciting a topic as the Reform Bill or the imminent horrors of
Cholera, and those who held the most decided views on the subject were
women and landholders.  Women both old and young regarded travelling by
steam as presumptuous and dangerous, and argued against it by saying
that nothing should induce them to get into a railway carriage; while
proprietors, differing from each other in their arguments as much as
Mr. Solomon Featherstone differed from Lord Medlicote, were yet
unanimous in the opinion that in selling land, whether to the Enemy of
mankind or to a company obliged to purchase, these pernicious agencies
must be made to pay a very high price to landowners for permission to
injure mankind.

But the slower wits, such as Mr. Solomon and Mrs. Waule, who both
occupied land of their own, took a long time to arrive at this
conclusion, their minds halting at the vivid conception of what it
would be to cut the Big Pasture in two, and turn it into three-cornered
bits, which would be "nohow;" while accommodation-bridges and high
payments were remote and incredible.

"The cows will all cast their calves, brother," said Mrs. Waule, in a
tone of deep melancholy, "if the railway comes across the Near Close;
and I shouldn't wonder at the mare too, if she was in foal.  It's a
poor tale if a widow's property is to be spaded away, and the law say
nothing to it.  What's to hinder 'em from cutting right and left if
they begin?  It's well known, _I_ can't fight."

"The best way would be to say nothing, and set somebody on to send 'em
away with a flea in their ear, when they came spying and measuring,"
said Solomon.  "Folks did that about Brassing, by what I can
understand.  It's all a pretence, if the truth was known, about their
being forced to take one way.  Let 'em go cutting in another parish.
And I don't believe in any pay to make amends for bringing a lot of
ruffians to trample your crops.  Where's a company's pocket?"

"Brother Peter, God forgive him, got money out of a company," said Mrs.
Waule.  "But that was for the manganese.  That wasn't for railways to
blow you to pieces right and left."

"Well, there's this to be said, Jane," Mr. Solomon concluded, lowering
his voice in a cautious manner--"the more spokes we put in their wheel,
the more they'll pay us to let 'em go on, if they must come whether or
not."

This reasoning of Mr. Solomon's was perhaps less thorough than he
imagined, his cunning bearing about the same relation to the course of
railways as the cunning of a diplomatist bears to the general chill or
catarrh of the solar system.  But he set about acting on his views in a
thoroughly diplomatic manner, by stimulating suspicion.  His side of
Lowick was the most remote from the village, and the houses of the
laboring people were either lone cottages or were collected in a hamlet
called Frick, where a water-mill and some stone-pits made a little
centre of slow, heavy-shouldered industry.

In the absence of any precise idea as to what railways were, public
opinion in Frick was against them; for the human mind in that grassy
corner had not the proverbial tendency to admire the unknown, holding
rather that it was likely to be against the poor man, and that
suspicion was the only wise attitude with regard to it.  Even the rumor
of Reform had not yet excited any millennial expectations in Frick,
there being no definite promise in it, as of gratuitous grains to
fatten Hiram Ford's pig, or of a publican at the "Weights and Scales"
who would brew beer for nothing, or of an offer on the part of the
three neighboring farmers to raise wages during winter.  And without
distinct good of this kind in its promises, Reform seemed on a footing
with the bragging of pedlers, which was a hint for distrust to every
knowing person.  The men of Frick were not ill-fed, and were less given
to fanaticism than to a strong muscular suspicion; less inclined to
believe that they were peculiarly cared for by heaven, than to regard
heaven itself as rather disposed to take them in--a disposition
observable in the weather.

Thus the mind of Frick was exactly of the sort for Mr. Solomon
Featherstone to work upon, he having more plenteous ideas of the same
order, with a suspicion of heaven and earth which was better fed and
more entirely at leisure.  Solomon was overseer of the roads at that
time, and on his slow-paced cob often took his rounds by Frick to look
at the workmen getting the stones there, pausing with a mysterious
deliberation, which might have misled you into supposing that he had
some other reason for staying than the mere want of impulse to move.
After looking for a long while at any work that was going on, he would
raise his eyes a little and look at the horizon; finally he would shake
his bridle, touch his horse with the whip, and get it to move slowly
onward.  The hour-hand of a clock was quick by comparison with Mr.
Solomon, who had an agreeable sense that he could afford to be slow.
He was in the habit of pausing for a cautious, vaguely designing chat
with every hedger or ditcher on his way, and was especially willing to
listen even to news which he had heard before, feeling himself at an
advantage over all narrators in partially disbelieving them.  One day,
however, he got into a dialogue with Hiram Ford, a wagoner, in which he
himself contributed information.  He wished to know whether Hiram had
seen fellows with staves and instruments spying about: they called
themselves railroad people, but there was no telling what they were or
what they meant to do.  The least they pretended was that they were
going to cut Lowick Parish into sixes and sevens.

"Why, there'll be no stirrin' from one pla-ace to another," said Hiram,
thinking of his wagon and horses.

"Not a bit," said Mr. Solomon.  "And cutting up fine land such as this
parish!  Let 'em go into Tipton, say I. But there's no knowing what
there is at the bottom of it.  Traffic is what they put for'ard; but
it's to do harm to the land and the poor man in the long-run."

"Why, they're Lunnon chaps, I reckon," said Hiram, who had a dim notion
of London as a centre of hostility to the country.

"Ay, to be sure.  And in some parts against Brassing, by what I've
heard say, the folks fell on 'em when they were spying, and broke their
peep-holes as they carry, and drove 'em away, so as they knew better
than come again."

"It war good foon, I'd be bound," said Hiram, whose fun was much
restricted by circumstances.

"Well, I wouldn't meddle with 'em myself," said Solomon.  "But some say
this country's seen its best days, and the sign is, as it's being
overrun with these fellows trampling right and left, and wanting to cut
it up into railways; and all for the big traffic to swallow up the
little, so as there shan't be a team left on the land, nor a whip to
crack."

"I'll crack _my_ whip about their ear'n, afore they bring it to that,
though," said Hiram, while Mr. Solomon, shaking his bridle, moved
onward.

Nettle-seed needs no digging.  The ruin of this countryside by
railroads was discussed, not only at the "Weights and Scales," but in
the hay-field, where the muster of working hands gave opportunities for
talk such as were rarely had through the rural year.

One morning, not long after that interview between Mr. Farebrother and
Mary Garth, in which she confessed to him her feeling for Fred Vincy,
it happened that her father had some business which took him to
Yoddrell's farm in the direction of Frick: it was to measure and value
an outlying piece of land belonging to Lowick Manor, which Caleb
expected to dispose of advantageously for Dorothea (it must be
confessed that his bias was towards getting the best possible terms
from railroad companies). He put up his gig at Yoddrell's, and in
walking with his assistant and measuring-chain to the scene of his
work, he encountered the party of the company's agents, who were
adjusting their spirit-level. After a little chat he left them,
observing that by-and-by they would reach him again where he was going
to measure.  It was one of those gray mornings after light rains, which
become delicious about twelve o'clock, when the clouds part a little,
and the scent of the earth is sweet along the lanes and by the
hedgerows.

The scent would have been sweeter to Fred Vincy, who was coming along
the lanes on horseback, if his mind had not been worried by
unsuccessful efforts to imagine what he was to do, with his father on
one side expecting him straightway to enter the Church, with Mary on
the other threatening to forsake him if he did enter it, and with the
working-day world showing no eager need whatever of a young gentleman
without capital and generally unskilled.  It was the harder to Fred's
disposition because his father, satisfied that he was no longer
rebellious, was in good humor with him, and had sent him on this
pleasant ride to see after some greyhounds.  Even when he had fixed on
what he should do, there would be the task of telling his father.  But
it must be admitted that the fixing, which had to come first, was the
more difficult task:--what secular avocation on earth was there for a
young man (whose friends could not get him an "appointment") which was
at once gentlemanly, lucrative, and to be followed without special
knowledge?  Riding along the lanes by Frick in this mood, and
slackening his pace while he reflected whether he should venture to go
round by Lowick Parsonage to call on Mary, he could see over the hedges
from one field to another.  Suddenly a noise roused his attention, and
on the far side of a field on his left hand he could see six or seven
men in smock-frocks with hay-forks in their hands making an offensive
approach towards the four railway agents who were facing them, while
Caleb Garth and his assistant were hastening across the field to join
the threatened group.  Fred, delayed a few moments by having to find
the gate, could not gallop up to the spot before the party in
smock-frocks, whose work of turning the hay had not been too pressing
after swallowing their mid-day beer, were driving the men in coats
before them with their hay-forks; while Caleb Garth's assistant, a lad
of seventeen, who had snatched up the spirit-level at Caleb's order,
had been knocked down and seemed to be lying helpless.  The coated men
had the advantage as runners, and Fred covered their retreat by getting
in front of the smock-frocks and charging them suddenly enough to throw
their chase into confusion.  "What do you confounded fools mean?"
shouted Fred, pursuing the divided group in a zigzag, and cutting right
and left with his whip.  "I'll swear to every one of you before the
magistrate.  You've knocked the lad down and killed him, for what I
know.  You'll every one of you be hanged at the next assizes, if you
don't mind," said Fred, who afterwards laughed heartily as he
remembered his own phrases.

The laborers had been driven through the gate-way into their hay-field,
and Fred had checked his horse, when Hiram Ford, observing himself at a
safe challenging distance, turned back and shouted a defiance which he
did not know to be Homeric.

"Yo're a coward, yo are.  Yo git off your horse, young measter, and
I'll have a round wi' ye, I wull.  Yo daredn't come on wi'out your hoss
an' whip.  I'd soon knock the breath out on ye, I would."

"Wait a minute, and I'll come back presently, and have a round with you
all in turn, if you like," said Fred, who felt confidence in his power
of boxing with his dearly beloved brethren.  But just now he wanted to
hasten back to Caleb and the prostrate youth.

The lad's ankle was strained, and he was in much pain from it, but he
was no further hurt, and Fred placed him on the horse that he might
ride to Yoddrell's and be taken care of there.

"Let them put the horse in the stable, and tell the surveyors they can
come back for their traps," said Fred.  "The ground is clear now."

"No, no," said Caleb, "here's a breakage.  They'll have to give up for
to-day, and it will be as well.  Here, take the things before you on
the horse, Tom.  They'll see you coming, and they'll turn back."

"I'm glad I happened to be here at the right moment, Mr. Garth," said
Fred, as Tom rode away.  "No knowing what might have happened if the
cavalry had not come up in time."

"Ay, ay, it was lucky," said Caleb, speaking rather absently, and
looking towards the spot where he had been at work at the moment of
interruption.  "But--deuce take it--this is what comes of men being
fools--I'm hindered of my day's work.  I can't get along without
somebody to help me with the measuring-chain. However!" He was
beginning to move towards the spot with a look of vexation, as if he
had forgotten Fred's presence, but suddenly he turned round and said
quickly, "What have you got to do to-day, young fellow?"

"Nothing, Mr. Garth.  I'll help you with pleasure--can I?" said Fred,
with a sense that he should be courting Mary when he was helping her
father.

"Well, you mustn't mind stooping and getting hot."

"I don't mind anything.  Only I want to go first and have a round with
that hulky fellow who turned to challenge me.  It would be a good
lesson for him.  I shall not be five minutes."

"Nonsense!" said Caleb, with his most peremptory intonation.  "I shall
go and speak to the men myself.  It's all ignorance.  Somebody has been
telling them lies.  The poor fools don't know any better."

"I shall go with you, then," said Fred.

"No, no; stay where you are.  I don't want your young blood.  I can
take care of myself."

Caleb was a powerful man and knew little of any fear except the fear of
hurting others and the fear of having to speechify.  But he felt it his
duty at this moment to try and give a little harangue.  There was a
striking mixture in him--which came from his having always been a
hard-working man himself--of rigorous notions about workmen and
practical indulgence towards them.  To do a good day's work and to do
it well, he held to be part of their welfare, as it was the chief part
of his own happiness; but he had a strong sense of fellowship with
them.  When he advanced towards the laborers they had not gone to work
again, but were standing in that form of rural grouping which consists
in each turning a shoulder towards the other, at a distance of two or
three yards.  They looked rather sulkily at Caleb, who walked quickly
with one hand in his pocket and the other thrust between the buttons of
his waistcoat, and had his every-day mild air when he paused among them.

"Why, my lads, how's this?" he began, taking as usual to brief phrases,
which seemed pregnant to himself, because he had many thoughts lying
under them, like the abundant roots of a plant that just manages to
peep above the water.  "How came you to make such a mistake as this?
Somebody has been telling you lies.  You thought those men up there
wanted to do mischief."

"Aw!" was the answer, dropped at intervals by each according to his
degree of unreadiness.

"Nonsense!  No such thing!  They're looking out to see which way the
railroad is to take.  Now, my lads, you can't hinder the railroad: it
will be made whether you like it or not.  And if you go fighting
against it, you'll get yourselves into trouble.  The law gives those
men leave to come here on the land.  The owner has nothing to say
against it, and if you meddle with them you'll have to do with the
constable and Justice Blakesley, and with the handcuffs and Middlemarch
jail.  And you might be in for it now, if anybody informed against you."

Caleb paused here, and perhaps the greatest orator could not have
chosen either his pause or his images better for the occasion.

"But come, you didn't mean any harm.  Somebody told you the railroad
was a bad thing.  That was a lie.  It may do a bit of harm here and
there, to this and to that; and so does the sun in heaven.  But the
railway's a good thing."

"Aw! good for the big folks to make money out on," said old Timothy
Cooper, who had stayed behind turning his hay while the others had been
gone on their spree;--"I'n seen lots o' things turn up sin' I war a
young un--the war an' the peace, and the canells, an' the oald King
George, an' the Regen', an' the new King George, an' the new un as has
got a new ne-ame--an' it's been all aloike to the poor mon.  What's the
canells been t' him?  They'n brought him neyther me-at nor be-acon, nor
wage to lay by, if he didn't save it wi' clemmin' his own inside.
Times ha' got wusser for him sin' I war a young un.  An' so it'll be
wi' the railroads.  They'll on'y leave the poor mon furder behind.  But
them are fools as meddle, and so I told the chaps here.  This is the
big folks's world, this is.  But yo're for the big folks, Muster Garth,
yo are."

Timothy was a wiry old laborer, of a type lingering in those times--who
had his savings in a stocking-foot, lived in a lone cottage, and was
not to be wrought on by any oratory, having as little of the feudal
spirit, and believing as little, as if he had not been totally
unacquainted with the Age of Reason and the Rights of Man.  Caleb was
in a difficulty known to any person attempting in dark times and
unassisted by miracle to reason with rustics who are in possession of
an undeniable truth which they know through a hard process of feeling,
and can let it fall like a giant's club on your neatly carved argument
for a social benefit which they do not feel.  Caleb had no cant at
command, even if he could have chosen to use it; and he had been
accustomed to meet all such difficulties in no other way than by doing
his "business" faithfully.  He answered--

"If you don't think well of me, Tim, never mind; that's neither here
nor there now.  Things may be bad for the poor man--bad they are; but I
want the lads here not to do what will make things worse for
themselves.  The cattle may have a heavy load, but it won't help 'em to
throw it over into the roadside pit, when it's partly their own fodder."

"We war on'y for a bit o' foon," said Hiram, who was beginning to see
consequences.  "That war all we war arter."

"Well, promise me not to meddle again, and I'll see that nobody informs
against you."

"I'n ne'er meddled, an' I'n no call to promise," said Timothy.

"No, but the rest.  Come, I'm as hard at work as any of you to-day, and
I can't spare much time.  Say you'll be quiet without the constable."

"Aw, we wooant meddle--they may do as they loike for oos"--were the
forms in which Caleb got his pledges; and then he hastened back to
Fred, who had followed him, and watched him in the gateway.

They went to work, and Fred helped vigorously.  His spirits had risen,
and he heartily enjoyed a good slip in the moist earth under the
hedgerow, which soiled his perfect summer trousers.  Was it his
successful onset which had elated him, or the satisfaction of helping
Mary's father?  Something more.  The accidents of the morning had
helped his frustrated imagination to shape an employment for himself
which had several attractions.  I am not sure that certain fibres in
Mr. Garth's mind had not resumed their old vibration towards the very
end which now revealed itself to Fred.  For the effective accident is
but the touch of fire where there is oil and tow; and it always
appeared to Fred that the railway brought the needed touch.  But they
went on in silence except when their business demanded speech.  At
last, when they had finished and were walking away, Mr. Garth said--

"A young fellow needn't be a B. A. to do this sort of work, eh, Fred?"

"I wish I had taken to it before I had thought of being a B. A.," said
Fred.  He paused a moment, and then added, more hesitatingly, "Do you
think I am too old to learn your business, Mr. Garth?"

"My business is of many sorts, my boy," said Mr. Garth, smiling.  "A
good deal of what I know can only come from experience: you can't learn
it off as you learn things out of a book.  But you are young enough to
lay a foundation yet."  Caleb pronounced the last sentence
emphatically, but paused in some uncertainty.  He had been under the
impression lately that Fred had made up his mind to enter the Church.

"You do think I could do some good at it, if I were to try?" said Fred,
more eagerly.

"That depends," said Caleb, turning his head on one side and lowering
his voice, with the air of a man who felt himself to be saying
something deeply religious.  "You must be sure of two things: you must
love your work, and not be always looking over the edge of it, wanting
your play to begin.  And the other is, you must not be ashamed of your
work, and think it would be more honorable to you to be doing something
else.  You must have a pride in your own work and in learning to do it
well, and not be always saying, There's this and there's that--if I had
this or that to do, I might make something of it.  No matter what a man
is--I wouldn't give twopence for him"--here Caleb's mouth looked
bitter, and he snapped his fingers--"whether he was the prime minister
or the rick-thatcher, if he didn't do well what he undertook to do."

"I can never feel that I should do that in being a clergyman," said
Fred, meaning to take a step in argument.

"Then let it alone, my boy," said Caleb, abruptly, "else you'll never
be easy.  Or, if you _are_ easy, you'll be a poor stick."

"That is very nearly what Mary thinks about it," said Fred, coloring.
"I think you must know what I feel for Mary, Mr. Garth: I hope it does
not displease you that I have always loved her better than any one
else, and that I shall never love any one as I love her."

The expression of Caleb's face was visibly softening while Fred spoke.
But he swung his head with a solemn slowness, and said--

"That makes things more serious, Fred, if you want to take Mary's
happiness into your keeping."

"I know that, Mr. Garth," said Fred, eagerly, "and I would do anything
for _her_.  She says she will never have me if I go into the Church;
and I shall be the most miserable devil in the world if I lose all hope
of Mary.  Really, if I could get some other profession,
business--anything that I am at all fit for, I would work hard, I would
deserve your good opinion.  I should like to have to do with outdoor
things.  I know a good deal about land and cattle already.  I used to
believe, you know--though you will think me rather foolish for it--that
I should have land of my own.  I am sure knowledge of that sort would
come easily to me, especially if I could be under you in any way."

"Softly, my boy," said Caleb, having the image of "Susan" before his
eyes.  "What have you said to your father about all this?"

"Nothing, yet; but I must tell him.  I am only waiting to know what I
can do instead of entering the Church.  I am very sorry to disappoint
him, but a man ought to be allowed to judge for himself when he is
four-and-twenty. How could I know when I was fifteen, what it would be
right for me to do now?  My education was a mistake."

"But hearken to this, Fred," said Caleb.  "Are you sure Mary is fond of
you, or would ever have you?"

"I asked Mr. Farebrother to talk to her, because she had forbidden
me--I didn't know what else to do," said Fred, apologetically.  "And he
says that I have every reason to hope, if I can put myself in an
honorable position--I mean, out of the Church. I dare say you think it
unwarrantable in me, Mr. Garth, to be troubling you and obtruding my
own wishes about Mary, before I have done anything at all for myself.
Of course I have not the least claim--indeed, I have already a debt to
you which will never be discharged, even when I have been, able to pay
it in the shape of money."

"Yes, my boy, you have a claim," said Caleb, with much feeling in his
voice.  "The young ones have always a claim on the old to help them
forward.  I was young myself once and had to do without much help; but
help would have been welcome to me, if it had been only for the
fellow-feeling's sake.  But I must consider.  Come to me to-morrow at
the office, at nine o'clock. At the office, mind."

Mr. Garth would take no important step without consulting Susan, but it
must be confessed that before he reached home he had taken his
resolution.  With regard to a large number of matters about which other
men are decided or obstinate, he was the most easily manageable man in
the world.  He never knew what meat he would choose, and if Susan had
said that they ought to live in a four-roomed cottage, in order to
save, he would have said, "Let us go," without inquiring into details.
But where Caleb's feeling and judgment strongly pronounced, he was a
ruler; and in spite of his mildness and timidity in reproving, every
one about him knew that on the exceptional occasions when he chose, he
was absolute.  He never, indeed, chose to be absolute except on some
one else's behalf.  On ninety-nine points Mrs. Garth decided, but on
the hundredth she was often aware that she would have to perform the
singularly difficult task of carrying out her own principle, and to
make herself subordinate.

"It is come round as I thought, Susan," said Caleb, when they were
seated alone in the evening.  He had already narrated the adventure
which had brought about Fred's sharing in his work, but had kept back
the further result.  "The children _are_ fond of each other--I mean,
Fred and Mary."

Mrs. Garth laid her work on her knee, and fixed her penetrating eyes
anxiously on her husband.

"After we'd done our work, Fred poured it all out to me.  He can't bear
to be a clergyman, and Mary says she won't have him if he is one; and
the lad would like to be under me and give his mind to business.  And
I've determined to take him and make a man of him."

"Caleb!" said Mrs. Garth, in a deep contralto, expressive of resigned
astonishment.

"It's a fine thing to do," said Mr. Garth, settling himself firmly
against the back of his chair, and grasping the elbows.  "I shall have
trouble with him, but I think I shall carry it through.  The lad loves
Mary, and a true love for a good woman is a great thing, Susan.  It
shapes many a rough fellow."

"Has Mary spoken to you on the subject?" said Mrs Garth, secretly a
little hurt that she had to be informed on it herself.

"Not a word.  I asked her about Fred once; I gave her a bit of a
warning.  But she assured me she would never marry an idle
self-indulgent man--nothing since.  But it seems Fred set on Mr.
Farebrother to talk to her, because she had forbidden him to speak
himself, and Mr. Farebrother has found out that she is fond of Fred,
but says he must not be a clergyman.  Fred's heart is fixed on Mary,
that I can see: it gives me a good opinion of the lad--and we always
liked him, Susan."

"It is a pity for Mary, I think," said Mrs. Garth.

"Why--a pity?"

"Because, Caleb, she might have had a man who is worth twenty Fred
Vincy's."

"Ah?" said Caleb, with surprise.

"I firmly believe that Mr. Farebrother is attached to her, and meant to
make her an offer; but of course, now that Fred has used him as an
envoy, there is an end to that better prospect." There was a severe
precision in Mrs. Garth's utterance.  She was vexed and disappointed,
but she was bent on abstaining from useless words.

Caleb was silent a few moments under a conflict of feelings.  He looked
at the floor and moved his head and hands in accompaniment to some
inward argumentation.  At last he said--

"That would have made me very proud and happy, Susan, and I should have
been glad for your sake.  I've always felt that your belongings have
never been on a level with you.  But you took me, though I was a plain
man."

"I took the best and cleverest man I had ever known," said Mrs. Garth,
convinced that _she_ would never have loved any one who came short of
that mark.

"Well, perhaps others thought you might have done better.  But it would
have been worse for me.  And that is what touches me close about Fred.
The lad is good at bottom, and clever enough to do, if he's put in the
right way; and he loves and honors my daughter beyond anything, and she
has given him a sort of promise according to what he turns out.  I say,
that young man's soul is in my hand; and I'll do the best I can for
him, so help me God!  It's my duty, Susan."

Mrs. Garth was not given to tears, but there was a large one rolling
down her face before her husband had finished.  It came from the
pressure of various feelings, in which there was much affection and
some vexation.  She wiped it away quickly, saying--

"Few men besides you would think it a duty to add to their anxieties in
that way, Caleb."

"That signifies nothing--what other men would think.  I've got a clear
feeling inside me, and that I shall follow; and I hope your heart will
go with me, Susan, in making everything as light as can be to Mary,
poor child."

Caleb, leaning back in his chair, looked with anxious appeal towards
his wife.  She rose and kissed him, saying, "God bless you, Caleb!  Our
children have a good father."

But she went out and had a hearty cry to make up for the suppression of
her words.  She felt sure that her husband's conduct would be
misunderstood, and about Fred she was rational and unhopeful.  Which
would turn out to have the more foresight in it--her rationality or
Caleb's ardent generosity?

When Fred went to the office the next morning, there was a test to be
gone through which he was not prepared for.

"Now Fred," said Caleb, "you will have some desk-work. I have always
done a good deal of writing myself, but I can't do without help, and as
I want you to understand the accounts and get the values into your
head, I mean to do without another clerk.  So you must buckle to.  How
are you at writing and arithmetic?"

Fred felt an awkward movement of the heart; he had not thought of
desk-work; but he was in a resolute mood, and not going to shrink.
"I'm not afraid of arithmetic, Mr. Garth: it always came easily to me.
I think you know my writing."

"Let us see," said Caleb, taking up a pen, examining it carefully and
handing it, well dipped, to Fred with a sheet of ruled paper.  "Copy me
a line or two of that valuation, with the figures at the end."

At that time the opinion existed that it was beneath a gentleman to
write legibly, or with a hand in the least suitable to a clerk.  Fred
wrote the lines demanded in a hand as gentlemanly as that of any
viscount or bishop of the day: the vowels were all alike and the
consonants only distinguishable as turning up or down, the strokes had
a blotted solidity and the letters disdained to keep the line--in
short, it was a manuscript of that venerable kind easy to interpret
when you know beforehand what the writer means.

As Caleb looked on, his visage showed a growing depression, but when
Fred handed him the paper he gave something like a snarl, and rapped
the paper passionately with the back of his hand.  Bad work like this
dispelled all Caleb's mildness.

"The deuce!" he exclaimed, snarlingly.  "To think that this is a
country where a man's education may cost hundreds and hundreds, and it
turns you out this!"  Then in a more pathetic tone, pushing up his
spectacles and looking at the unfortunate scribe, "The Lord have mercy
on us, Fred, I can't put up with this!"

"What can I do, Mr. Garth?" said Fred, whose spirits had sunk very low,
not only at the estimate of his handwriting, but at the vision of
himself as liable to be ranked with office clerks.

"Do?  Why, you must learn to form your letters and keep the line.
What's the use of writing at all if nobody can understand it?" asked
Caleb, energetically, quite preoccupied with the bad quality of the
work.  "Is there so little business in the world that you must be
sending puzzles over the country?  But that's the way people are
brought up.  I should lose no end of time with the letters some people
send me, if Susan did not make them out for me.  It's disgusting." Here
Caleb tossed the paper from him.

Any stranger peeping into the office at that moment might have wondered
what was the drama between the indignant man of business, and the
fine-looking young fellow whose blond complexion was getting rather
patchy as he bit his lip with mortification.  Fred was struggling with
many thoughts.  Mr. Garth had been so kind and encouraging at the
beginning of their interview, that gratitude and hopefulness had been
at a high pitch, and the downfall was proportionate.  He had not
thought of desk-work--in fact, like the majority of young gentlemen, he
wanted an occupation which should be free from disagreeables.  I cannot
tell what might have been the consequences if he had not distinctly
promised himself that he would go to Lowick to see Mary and tell her
that he was engaged to work under her father.  He did not like to
disappoint himself there.

"I am very sorry," were all the words that he could muster.  But Mr.
Garth was already relenting.

"We must make the best of it, Fred," he began, with a return to his
usual quiet tone.  "Every man can learn to write.  I taught myself.  Go
at it with a will, and sit up at night if the day-time isn't enough.
We'll be patient, my boy.  Callum shall go on with the books for a bit,
while you are learning.  But now I must be off," said Caleb, rising.
"You must let your father know our agreement.  You'll save me Callum's
salary, you know, when you can write; and I can afford to give you
eighty pounds for the first year, and more after."

When Fred made the necessary disclosure to his parents, the relative
effect on the two was a surprise which entered very deeply into his
memory.  He went straight from Mr. Garth's office to the warehouse,
rightly feeling that the most respectful way in which he could behave
to his father was to make the painful communication as gravely and
formally as possible.  Moreover, the decision would be more certainly
understood to be final, if the interview took place in his father's
gravest hours, which were always those spent in his private room at the
warehouse.

Fred entered on the subject directly, and declared briefly what he had
done and was resolved to do, expressing at the end his regret that he
should be the cause of disappointment to his father, and taking the
blame on his own deficiencies.  The regret was genuine, and inspired
Fred with strong, simple words.

Mr. Vincy listened in profound surprise without uttering even an
exclamation, a silence which in his impatient temperament was a sign of
unusual emotion.  He had not been in good spirits about trade that
morning, and the slight bitterness in his lips grew intense as he
listened.  When Fred had ended, there was a pause of nearly a minute,
during which Mr. Vincy replaced a book in his desk and turned the key
emphatically.  Then he looked at his son steadily, and said--

"So you've made up your mind at last, sir?"

"Yes, father."

"Very well; stick to it.  I've no more to say.  You've thrown away your
education, and gone down a step in life, when I had given you the means
of rising, that's all."

"I am very sorry that we differ, father.  I think I can be quite as
much of a gentleman at the work I have undertaken, as if I had been a
curate.  But I am grateful to you for wishing to do the best for me."

"Very well; I have no more to say.  I wash my hands of you.  I only
hope, when you have a son of your own he will make a better return for
the pains you spend on him."

This was very cutting to Fred.  His father was using that unfair
advantage possessed by us all when we are in a pathetic situation and
see our own past as if it were simply part of the pathos.  In reality,
Mr. Vincy's wishes about his son had had a great deal of pride,
inconsiderateness, and egoistic folly in them.  But still the
disappointed father held a strong lever; and Fred felt as if he were
being banished with a malediction.

"I hope you will not object to my remaining at home, sir?" he said,
after rising to go; "I shall have a sufficient salary to pay for my
board, as of course I should wish to do."

"Board be hanged!" said Mr. Vincy, recovering himself in his disgust at
the notion that Fred's keep would be missed at his table.  "Of course
your mother will want you to stay.  But I shall keep no horse for you,
you understand; and you will pay your own tailor.  You will do with a
suit or two less, I fancy, when you have to pay for 'em."

Fred lingered; there was still something to be said.  At last it came.

"I hope you will shake hands with me, father, and forgive me the
vexation I have caused you."

Mr. Vincy from his chair threw a quick glance upward at his son, who
had advanced near to him, and then gave his hand, saying hurriedly,
"Yes, yes, let us say no more."

Fred went through much more narrative and explanation with his mother,
but she was inconsolable, having before her eyes what perhaps her
husband had never thought of, the certainty that Fred would marry Mary
Garth, that her life would henceforth be spoiled by a perpetual
infusion of Garths and their ways, and that her darling boy, with his
beautiful face and stylish air "beyond anybody else's son in
Middlemarch," would be sure to get like that family in plainness of
appearance and carelessness about his clothes.  To her it seemed that
there was a Garth conspiracy to get possession of the desirable Fred,
but she dared not enlarge on this opinion, because a slight hint of it
had made him "fly out" at her as he had never done before.  Her temper
was too sweet for her to show any anger, but she felt that her
happiness had received a bruise, and for several days merely to look at
Fred made her cry a little as if he were the subject of some baleful
prophecy.  Perhaps she was the slower to recover her usual cheerfulness
because Fred had warned her that she must not reopen the sore question
with his father, who had accepted his decision and forgiven him.  If
her husband had been vehement against Fred, she would have been urged
into defence of her darling.  It was the end of the fourth day when Mr.
Vincy said to her--

"Come, Lucy, my dear, don't be so down-hearted. You always have spoiled
the boy, and you must go on spoiling him."

"Nothing ever did cut me so before, Vincy," said the wife, her fair
throat and chin beginning to tremble again, "only his illness."

"Pooh, pooh, never mind!  We must expect to have trouble with our
children.  Don't make it worse by letting me see you out of spirits."

"Well, I won't," said Mrs. Vincy, roused by this appeal and adjusting
herself with a little shake as of a bird which lays down its ruffled
plumage.

"It won't do to begin making a fuss about one," said Mr. Vincy, wishing
to combine a little grumbling with domestic cheerfulness.  "There's
Rosamond as well as Fred."

"Yes, poor thing.  I'm sure I felt for her being disappointed of her
baby; but she got over it nicely."

"Baby, pooh!  I can see Lydgate is making a mess of his practice, and
getting into debt too, by what I hear.  I shall have Rosamond coming to
me with a pretty tale one of these days.  But they'll get no money from
me, I know.  Let _his_ family help him.  I never did like that
marriage.  But it's no use talking.  Ring the bell for lemons, and
don't look dull any more, Lucy.  I'll drive you and Louisa to Riverston
to-morrow."



CHAPTER LVII.

    They numbered scarce eight summers when a name
        Rose on their souls and stirred such motions there
    As thrill the buds and shape their hidden frame
        At penetration of the quickening air:
    His name who told of loyal Evan Dhu,
        Of quaint Bradwardine, and Vich Ian Vor,
    Making the little world their childhood knew
        Large with a land of mountain lake and scaur,
    And larger yet with wonder love belief
        Toward Walter Scott who living far away
    Sent them this wealth of joy and noble grief.
        The book and they must part, but day by day,
            In lines that thwart like portly spiders ran
            They wrote the tale, from Tully Veolan.


The evening that Fred Vincy walked to Lowick parsonage (he had begun to
see that this was a world in which even a spirited young man must
sometimes walk for want of a horse to carry him) he set out at five
o'clock and called on Mrs. Garth by the way, wishing to assure himself
that she accepted their new relations willingly.

He found the family group, dogs and cats included, under the great
apple-tree in the orchard.  It was a festival with Mrs. Garth, for her
eldest son, Christy, her peculiar joy and pride, had come home for a
short holiday--Christy, who held it the most desirable thing in the
world to be a tutor, to study all literatures and be a regenerate
Porson, and who was an incorporate criticism on poor Fred, a sort of
object-lesson given to him by the educational mother.  Christy himself,
a square-browed, broad-shouldered masculine edition of his mother not
much higher than Fred's shoulder--which made it the harder that he
should be held superior--was always as simple as possible, and thought
no more of Fred's disinclination to scholarship than of a giraffe's,
wishing that he himself were more of the same height.  He was lying on
the ground now by his mother's chair, with his straw hat laid flat over
his eyes, while Jim on the other side was reading aloud from that
beloved writer who has made a chief part in the happiness of many young
lives.  The volume was "Ivanhoe," and Jim was in the great archery
scene at the tournament, but suffered much interruption from Ben, who
had fetched his own old bow and arrows, and was making himself
dreadfully disagreeable, Letty thought, by begging all present to
observe his random shots, which no one wished to do except Brownie, the
active-minded but probably shallow mongrel, while the grizzled
Newfoundland lying in the sun looked on with the dull-eyed neutrality
of extreme old age.  Letty herself, showing as to her mouth and
pinafore some slight signs that she had been assisting at the gathering
of the cherries which stood in a coral-heap on the tea-table, was now
seated on the grass, listening open-eyed to the reading.

But the centre of interest was changed for all by the arrival of Fred
Vincy.  When, seating himself on a garden-stool, he said that he was on
his way to Lowick Parsonage, Ben, who had thrown down his bow, and
snatched up a reluctant half-grown kitten instead, strode across Fred's
outstretched leg, and said "Take me!"

"Oh, and me too," said Letty.

"You can't keep up with Fred and me," said Ben.

"Yes, I can.  Mother, please say that I am to go," urged Letty, whose
life was much checkered by resistance to her depreciation as a girl.

"I shall stay with Christy," observed Jim; as much as to say that he
had the advantage of those simpletons; whereupon Letty put her hand up
to her head and looked with jealous indecision from the one to the
other.

"Let us all go and see Mary," said Christy, opening his arms.

"No, my dear child, we must not go in a swarm to the parsonage.  And
that old Glasgow suit of yours would never do.  Besides, your father
will come home.  We must let Fred go alone.  He can tell Mary that you
are here, and she will come back to-morrow."

Christy glanced at his own threadbare knees, and then at Fred's
beautiful white trousers.  Certainly Fred's tailoring suggested the
advantages of an English university, and he had a graceful way even of
looking warm and of pushing his hair back with his handkerchief.

"Children, run away," said Mrs. Garth; "it is too warm to hang about
your friends.  Take your brother and show him the rabbits."

The eldest understood, and led off the children immediately.  Fred felt
that Mrs. Garth wished to give him an opportunity of saying anything he
had to say, but he could only begin by observing--

"How glad you must be to have Christy here!"

"Yes; he has come sooner than I expected.  He got down from the coach
at nine o'clock, just after his father went out.  I am longing for
Caleb to come and hear what wonderful progress Christy is making.  He
has paid his expenses for the last year by giving lessons, carrying on
hard study at the same time.  He hopes soon to get a private tutorship
and go abroad."

"He is a great fellow," said Fred, to whom these cheerful truths had a
medicinal taste, "and no trouble to anybody." After a slight pause, he
added, "But I fear you will think that I am going to be a great deal of
trouble to Mr. Garth."

"Caleb likes taking trouble: he is one of those men who always do more
than any one would have thought of asking them to do," answered Mrs.
Garth.  She was knitting, and could either look at Fred or not, as she
chose--always an advantage when one is bent on loading speech with
salutary meaning; and though Mrs. Garth intended to be duly reserved,
she did wish to say something that Fred might be the better for.

"I know you think me very undeserving, Mrs. Garth, and with good
reason," said Fred, his spirit rising a little at the perception of
something like a disposition to lecture him.  "I happen to have behaved
just the worst to the people I can't help wishing for the most from.
But while two men like Mr. Garth and Mr. Farebrother have not given me
up, I don't see why I should give myself up."  Fred thought it might be
well to suggest these masculine examples to Mrs. Garth.

"Assuredly," said she, with gathering emphasis.  "A young man for whom
two such elders had devoted themselves would indeed be culpable if he
threw himself away and made their sacrifices vain."

Fred wondered a little at this strong language, but only said, "I hope
it will not be so with me, Mrs. Garth, since I have some encouragement
to believe that I may win Mary.  Mr. Garth has told you about that?
You were not surprised, I dare say?"  Fred ended, innocently referring
only to his own love as probably evident enough.

"Not surprised that Mary has given you encouragement?" returned Mrs.
Garth, who thought it would be well for Fred to be more alive to the
fact that Mary's friends could not possibly have wished this
beforehand, whatever the Vincys might suppose.  "Yes, I confess I was
surprised."

"She never did give me any--not the least in the world, when I talked
to her myself," said Fred, eager to vindicate Mary.  "But when I asked
Mr. Farebrother to speak for me, she allowed him to tell me there was a
hope."

The power of admonition which had begun to stir in Mrs. Garth had not
yet discharged itself.  It was a little too provoking even for _her_
self-control that this blooming youngster should flourish on the
disappointments of sadder and wiser people--making a meal of a
nightingale and never knowing it--and that all the while his family
should suppose that hers was in eager need of this sprig; and her
vexation had fermented the more actively because of its total
repression towards her husband.  Exemplary wives will sometimes find
scapegoats in this way.  She now said with energetic decision, "You
made a great mistake, Fred, in asking Mr. Farebrother to speak for you."

"Did I?" said Fred, reddening instantaneously.  He was alarmed, but at
a loss to know what Mrs. Garth meant, and added, in an apologetic tone,
"Mr. Farebrother has always been such a friend of ours; and Mary, I
knew, would listen to him gravely; and he took it on himself quite
readily."

"Yes, young people are usually blind to everything but their own
wishes, and seldom imagine how much those wishes cost others," said
Mrs. Garth. She did not mean to go beyond this salutary general
doctrine, and threw her indignation into a needless unwinding of her
worsted, knitting her brow at it with a grand air.

"I cannot conceive how it could be any pain to Mr. Farebrother," said
Fred, who nevertheless felt that surprising conceptions were beginning
to form themselves.

"Precisely; you cannot conceive," said Mrs. Garth, cutting her words as
neatly as possible.

For a moment Fred looked at the horizon with a dismayed anxiety, and
then turning with a quick movement said almost sharply--

"Do you mean to say, Mrs. Garth, that Mr. Farebrother is in love with
Mary?"

"And if it were so, Fred, I think you are the last person who ought to
be surprised," returned Mrs. Garth, laying her knitting down beside her
and folding her arms.  It was an unwonted sign of emotion in her that
she should put her work out of her hands.  In fact her feelings were
divided between the satisfaction of giving Fred his discipline and the
sense of having gone a little too far.  Fred took his hat and stick and
rose quickly.

"Then you think I am standing in his way, and in Mary's too?" he said,
in a tone which seemed to demand an answer.

Mrs. Garth could not speak immediately.  She had brought herself into
the unpleasant position of being called on to say what she really felt,
yet what she knew there were strong reasons for concealing.  And to her
the consciousness of having exceeded in words was peculiarly
mortifying.  Besides, Fred had given out unexpected electricity, and he
now added, "Mr. Garth seemed pleased that Mary should be attached to
me.  He could not have known anything of this."

Mrs. Garth felt a severe twinge at this mention of her husband, the
fear that Caleb might think her in the wrong not being easily
endurable.  She answered, wanting to check unintended consequences--

"I spoke from inference only.  I am not aware that Mary knows anything
of the matter."

But she hesitated to beg that he would keep entire silence on a subject
which she had herself unnecessarily mentioned, not being used to stoop
in that way; and while she was hesitating there was already a rush of
unintended consequences under the apple-tree where the tea-things
stood.  Ben, bouncing across the grass with Brownie at his heels, and
seeing the kitten dragging the knitting by a lengthening line of wool,
shouted and clapped his hands; Brownie barked, the kitten, desperate,
jumped on the tea-table and upset the milk, then jumped down again and
swept half the cherries with it; and Ben, snatching up the half-knitted
sock-top, fitted it over the kitten's head as a new source of madness,
while Letty arriving cried out to her mother against this cruelty--it
was a history as full of sensation as "This is the house that Jack
built." Mrs. Garth was obliged to interfere, the other young ones came
up and the tete-a-tete with Fred was ended.  He got away as soon as he
could, and Mrs. Garth could only imply some retractation of her
severity by saying "God bless you" when she shook hands with him.

She was unpleasantly conscious that she had been on the verge of
speaking as "one of the foolish women speaketh"--telling first and
entreating silence after.  But she had not entreated silence, and to
prevent Caleb's blame she determined to blame herself and confess all
to him that very night.  It was curious what an awful tribunal the mild
Caleb's was to her, whenever he set it up.  But she meant to point out
to him that the revelation might do Fred Vincy a great deal of good.

No doubt it was having a strong effect on him as he walked to Lowick.
Fred's light hopeful nature had perhaps never had so much of a bruise
as from this suggestion that if he had been out of the way Mary might
have made a thoroughly good match.  Also he was piqued that he had been
what he called such a stupid lout as to ask that intervention from Mr.
Farebrother.  But it was not in a lover's nature--it was not in
Fred's, that the new anxiety raised about Mary's feeling should not
surmount every other.  Notwithstanding his trust in Mr. Farebrother's
generosity, notwithstanding what Mary had said to him, Fred could not
help feeling that he had a rival: it was a new consciousness, and he
objected to it extremely, not being in the least ready to give up Mary
for her good, being ready rather to fight for her with any man
whatsoever.  But the fighting with Mr. Farebrother must be of a
metaphorical kind, which was much more difficult to Fred than the
muscular.  Certainly this experience was a discipline for Fred hardly
less sharp than his disappointment about his uncle's will.  The iron
had not entered into his soul, but he had begun to imagine what the
sharp edge would be.  It did not once occur to Fred that Mrs. Garth
might be mistaken about Mr. Farebrother, but he suspected that she
might be wrong about Mary.  Mary had been staying at the parsonage
lately, and her mother might know very little of what had been passing
in her mind.

He did not feel easier when he found her looking cheerful with the
three ladies in the drawing-room. They were in animated discussion on
some subject which was dropped when he entered, and Mary was copying
the labels from a heap of shallow cabinet drawers, in a minute
handwriting which she was skilled in.  Mr. Farebrother was somewhere in
the village, and the three ladies knew nothing of Fred's peculiar
relation to Mary: it was impossible for either of them to propose that
they should walk round the garden, and Fred predicted to himself that
he should have to go away without saying a word to her in private.  He
told her first of Christy's arrival and then of his own engagement with
her father; and he was comforted by seeing that this latter news
touched her keenly.  She said hurriedly, "I am so glad," and then bent
over her writing to hinder any one from noticing her face.  But here
was a subject which Mrs. Farebrother could not let pass.

"You don't mean, my dear Miss Garth, that you are glad to hear of a
young man giving up the Church for which he was educated: you only mean
that things being so, you are glad that he should be under an excellent
man like your father."

"No, really, Mrs. Farebrother, I am glad of both, I fear," said Mary,
cleverly getting rid of one rebellious tear.  "I have a dreadfully
secular mind.  I never liked any clergyman except the Vicar of
Wakefield and Mr. Farebrother."

"Now why, my dear?" said Mrs. Farebrother, pausing on her large wooden
knitting-needles and looking at Mary.  "You have always a good reason
for your opinions, but this astonishes me.  Of course I put out of the
question those who preach new doctrine.  But why should you dislike
clergymen?"

"Oh dear," said Mary, her face breaking into merriment as she seemed to
consider a moment, "I don't like their neckcloths."

"Why, you don't like Camden's, then," said Miss Winifred, in some
anxiety.

"Yes, I do," said Mary.  "I don't like the other clergymen's
neckcloths, because it is they who wear them."

"How very puzzling!" said Miss Noble, feeling that her own intellect
was probably deficient.

"My dear, you are joking.  You would have better reasons than these for
slighting so respectable a class of men," said Mrs. Farebrother,
majestically.

"Miss Garth has such severe notions of what people should be that it is
difficult to satisfy her," said Fred.

"Well, I am glad at least that she makes an exception in favor of my
son," said the old lady.

Mary was wondering at Fred's piqued tone, when Mr. Farebrother came in
and had to hear the news about the engagement under Mr. Garth.  At the
end he said with quiet satisfaction, "_That_ is right;" and then bent
to look at Mary's labels and praise her handwriting.  Fred felt
horribly jealous--was glad, of course, that Mr. Farebrother was so
estimable, but wished that he had been ugly and fat as men at forty
sometimes are.  It was clear what the end would be, since Mary openly
placed Farebrother above everybody, and these women were all evidently
encouraging the affair.  He was feeling sure that he should have no
chance of speaking to Mary, when Mr. Farebrother said--

"Fred, help me to carry these drawers back into my study--you have
never seen my fine new study.  Pray come too, Miss Garth.  I want you
to see a stupendous spider I found this morning."

Mary at once saw the Vicar's intention.  He had never since the
memorable evening deviated from his old pastoral kindness towards her,
and her momentary wonder and doubt had quite gone to sleep.  Mary was
accustomed to think rather rigorously of what was probable, and if a
belief flattered her vanity she felt warned to dismiss it as
ridiculous, having early had much exercise in such dismissals.  It was
as she had foreseen: when Fred had been asked to admire the fittings of
the study, and she had been asked to admire the spider, Mr. Farebrother
said--

"Wait here a minute or two.  I am going to look out an engraving which
Fred is tall enough to hang for me.  I shall be back in a few minutes."
And then he went out.  Nevertheless, the first word Fred said to Mary
was--

"It is of no use, whatever I do, Mary.  You are sure to marry
Farebrother at last."  There was some rage in his tone.

"What do you mean, Fred?"  Mary exclaimed indignantly, blushing deeply,
and surprised out of all her readiness in reply.

"It is impossible that you should not see it all clearly enough--you
who see everything."

"I only see that you are behaving very ill, Fred, in speaking so of Mr.
Farebrother after he has pleaded your cause in every way.  How can you
have taken up such an idea?"

Fred was rather deep, in spite of his irritation.  If Mary had really
been unsuspicious, there was no good in telling her what Mrs. Garth had
said.

"It follows as a matter of course," he replied.  "When you are
continually seeing a man who beats me in everything, and whom you set
up above everybody, I can have no fair chance."

"You are very ungrateful, Fred," said Mary.  "I wish I had never told
Mr. Farebrother that I cared for you in the least."

"No, I am not ungrateful; I should be the happiest fellow in the world
if it were not for this.  I told your father everything, and he was
very kind; he treated me as if I were his son.  I could go at the work
with a will, writing and everything, if it were not for this."

"For this? for what?" said Mary, imagining now that something specific
must have been said or done.

"This dreadful certainty that I shall be bowled out by Farebrother."
Mary was appeased by her inclination to laugh.

"Fred," she said, peeping round to catch his eyes, which were sulkily
turned away from her, "you are too delightfully ridiculous.  If you
were not such a charming simpleton, what a temptation this would be to
play the wicked coquette, and let you suppose that somebody besides you
has made love to me."

"Do you really like me best, Mary?" said Fred, turning eyes full of
affection on her, and trying to take her hand.

"I don't like you at all at this moment," said Mary, retreating, and
putting her hands behind her.  "I only said that no mortal ever made
love to me besides you.  And that is no argument that a very wise man
ever will," she ended, merrily.

"I wish you would tell me that you could not possibly ever think of
him," said Fred.

"Never dare to mention this any more to me, Fred," said Mary, getting
serious again.  "I don't know whether it is more stupid or ungenerous
in you not to see that Mr. Farebrother has left us together on purpose
that we might speak freely.  I am disappointed that you should be so
blind to his delicate feeling."

There was no time to say any more before Mr. Farebrother came back with
the engraving; and Fred had to return to the drawing-room still with a
jealous dread in his heart, but yet with comforting arguments from
Mary's words and manner.  The result of the conversation was on the
whole more painful to Mary: inevitably her attention had taken a new
attitude, and she saw the possibility of new interpretations.  She was
in a position in which she seemed to herself to be slighting Mr.
Farebrother, and this, in relation to a man who is much honored, is
always dangerous to the firmness of a grateful woman.  To have a reason
for going home the next day was a relief, for Mary earnestly desired to
be always clear that she loved Fred best.  When a tender affection has
been storing itself in us through many of our years, the idea that we
could accept any exchange for it seems to be a cheapening of our lives.
And we can set a watch over our affections and our constancy as we can
over other treasures.

"Fred has lost all his other expectations; he must keep this," Mary
said to herself, with a smile curling her lips.  It was impossible to
help fleeting visions of another kind--new dignities and an
acknowledged value of which she had often felt the absence.  But these
things with Fred outside them, Fred forsaken and looking sad for the
want of her, could never tempt her deliberate thought.



CHAPTER LVIII.

    "For there can live no hatred in thine eye,
     Therefore in that I cannot know thy change:
     In many's looks the false heart's history
     Is writ in moods and frowns and wrinkles strange:
     But Heaven in thy creation did decree
     That in thy face sweet love should ever dwell:
     Whate'er thy thoughts or thy heart's workings be
     Thy looks should nothing thence but sweetness tell."
                                       --SHAKESPEARE: Sonnets.


At the time when Mr. Vincy uttered that presentiment about Rosamond,
she herself had never had the idea that she should be driven to make
the sort of appeal which he foresaw.  She had not yet had any anxiety
about ways and means, although her domestic life had been expensive as
well as eventful.  Her baby had been born prematurely, and all the
embroidered robes and caps had to be laid by in darkness.  This
misfortune was attributed entirely to her having persisted in going out
on horseback one day when her husband had desired her not to do so; but
it must not be supposed that she had shown temper on the occasion, or
rudely told him that she would do as she liked.

What led her particularly to desire horse-exercise was a visit from
Captain Lydgate, the baronet's third son, who, I am sorry to say, was
detested by our Tertius of that name as a vapid fop "parting his hair
from brow to nape in a despicable fashion" (not followed by Tertius
himself), and showing an ignorant security that he knew the proper
thing to say on every topic.  Lydgate inwardly cursed his own folly
that he had drawn down this visit by consenting to go to his uncle's on
the wedding-tour, and he made himself rather disagreeable to Rosamond
by saying so in private.  For to Rosamond this visit was a source of
unprecedented but gracefully concealed exultation.  She was so
intensely conscious of having a cousin who was a baronet's son staying
in the house, that she imagined the knowledge of what was implied by
his presence to be diffused through all other minds; and when she
introduced Captain Lydgate to her guests, she had a placid sense that
his rank penetrated them as if it had been an odor.  The satisfaction
was enough for the time to melt away some disappointment in the
conditions of marriage with a medical man even of good birth: it seemed
now that her marriage was visibly as well as ideally floating her above
the Middlemarch level, and the future looked bright with letters and
visits to and from Quallingham, and vague advancement in consequence
for Tertius.  Especially as, probably at the Captain's suggestion, his
married sister, Mrs. Mengan, had come with her maid, and stayed two
nights on her way from town.  Hence it was clearly worth while for
Rosamond to take pains with her music and the careful selection of her
lace.

As to Captain Lydgate himself, his low brow, his aquiline nose bent on
one side, and his rather heavy utterance, might have been
disadvantageous in any young gentleman who had not a military bearing
and mustache to give him what is doted on by some flower-like blond
heads as "style."  He had, moreover, that sort of high-breeding which
consists in being free from the petty solicitudes of middle-class
gentility, and he was a great critic of feminine charms.  Rosamond
delighted in his admiration now even more than she had done at
Quallingham, and he found it easy to spend several hours of the day in
flirting with her.  The visit altogether was one of the pleasantest
larks he had ever had, not the less so perhaps because he suspected
that his queer cousin Tertius wished him away: though Lydgate, who
would rather (hyperbolically speaking) have died than have failed in
polite hospitality, suppressed his dislike, and only pretended
generally not to hear what the gallant officer said, consigning the
task of answering him to Rosamond.  For he was not at all a jealous
husband, and preferred leaving a feather-headed young gentleman alone
with his wife to bearing him company.

"I wish you would talk more to the Captain at dinner, Tertius," said
Rosamond, one evening when the important guest was gone to Loamford to
see some brother officers stationed there.  "You really look so absent
sometimes--you seem to be seeing through his head into something behind
it, instead of looking at him."

"My dear Rosy, you don't expect me to talk much to such a conceited ass
as that, I hope," said Lydgate, brusquely.  "If he got his head broken,
I might look at it with interest, not before."

"I cannot conceive why you should speak of your cousin so
contemptuously," said Rosamond, her fingers moving at her work while
she spoke with a mild gravity which had a touch of disdain in it.

"Ask Ladislaw if he doesn't think your Captain the greatest bore he
ever met with.  Ladislaw has almost forsaken the house since he came."

Rosamond thought she knew perfectly well why Mr. Ladislaw disliked the
Captain: he was jealous, and she liked his being jealous.

"It is impossible to say what will suit eccentric persons," she
answered, "but in my opinion Captain Lydgate is a thorough gentleman,
and I think you ought not, out of respect to Sir Godwin, to treat him
with neglect."

"No, dear; but we have had dinners for him.  And he comes in and goes
out as he likes.  He doesn't want me."

"Still, when he is in the room, you might show him more attention.  He
may not be a phoenix of cleverness in your sense; his profession is
different; but it would be all the better for you to talk a little on
his subjects.  _I_ think his conversation is quite agreeable.  And he
is anything but an unprincipled man."

"The fact is, you would wish me to be a little more like him, Rosy,"
said Lydgate, in a sort of resigned murmur, with a smile which was not
exactly tender, and certainly not merry.  Rosamond was silent and did
not smile again; but the lovely curves of her face looked good-tempered
enough without smiling.

Those words of Lydgate's were like a sad milestone marking how far he
had travelled from his old dreamland, in which Rosamond Vincy appeared
to be that perfect piece of womanhood who would reverence her husband's
mind after the fashion of an accomplished mermaid, using her comb and
looking-glass and singing her song for the relaxation of his adored
wisdom alone.  He had begun to distinguish between that imagined
adoration and the attraction towards a man's talent because it gives
him prestige, and is like an order in his button-hole or an Honorable
before his name.

It might have been supposed that Rosamond had travelled too, since she
had found the pointless conversation of Mr. Ned Plymdale perfectly
wearisome; but to most mortals there is a stupidity which is
unendurable and a stupidity which is altogether acceptable--else,
indeed, what would become of social bonds?  Captain Lydgate's stupidity
was delicately scented, carried itself with "style," talked with a good
accent, and was closely related to Sir Godwin.  Rosamond found it quite
agreeable and caught many of its phrases.

Therefore since Rosamond, as we know, was fond of horseback, there were
plenty of reasons why she should be tempted to resume her riding when
Captain Lydgate, who had ordered his man with two horses to follow him
and put up at the "Green Dragon," begged her to go out on the gray
which he warranted to be gentle and trained to carry a lady--indeed, he
had bought it for his sister, and was taking it to Quallingham.
Rosamond went out the first time without telling her husband, and came
back before his return; but the ride had been so thorough a success,
and she declared herself so much the better in consequence, that he was
informed of it with full reliance on his consent that she should go
riding again.

On the contrary Lydgate was more than hurt--he was utterly confounded
that she had risked herself on a strange horse without referring the
matter to his wish.  After the first almost thundering exclamations of
astonishment, which sufficiently warned Rosamond of what was coming, he
was silent for some moments.

"However, you have come back safely," he said, at last, in a decisive
tone.  "You will not go again, Rosy; that is understood.  If it were
the quietest, most familiar horse in the world, there would always be
the chance of accident.  And you know very well that I wished you to
give up riding the roan on that account."

"But there is the chance of accident indoors, Tertius."

"My darling, don't talk nonsense," said Lydgate, in an imploring tone;
"surely I am the person to judge for you.  I think it is enough that I
say you are not to go again."

Rosamond was arranging her hair before dinner, and the reflection of
her head in the glass showed no change in its loveliness except a
little turning aside of the long neck.  Lydgate had been moving about
with his hands in his pockets, and now paused near her, as if he
awaited some assurance.

"I wish you would fasten up my plaits, dear," said Rosamond, letting
her arms fall with a little sigh, so as to make a husband ashamed of
standing there like a brute.  Lydgate had often fastened the plaits
before, being among the deftest of men with his large finely formed
fingers.  He swept up the soft festoons of plaits and fastened in the
tall comb (to such uses do men come!); and what could he do then but
kiss the exquisite nape which was shown in all its delicate curves?
But when we do what we have done before, it is often with a difference.
Lydgate was still angry, and had not forgotten his point.

"I shall tell the Captain that he ought to have known better than offer
you his horse," he said, as he moved away.

"I beg you will not do anything of the kind, Tertius," said Rosamond,
looking at him with something more marked than usual in her speech.
"It will be treating me as if I were a child.  Promise that you will
leave the subject to me."

There did seem to be some truth in her objection.  Lydgate said, "Very
well," with a surly obedience, and thus the discussion ended with his
promising Rosamond, and not with her promising him.

In fact, she had been determined not to promise.  Rosamond had that
victorious obstinacy which never wastes its energy in impetuous
resistance.  What she liked to do was to her the right thing, and all
her cleverness was directed to getting the means of doing it.  She
meant to go out riding again on the gray, and she did go on the next
opportunity of her husband's absence, not intending that he should know
until it was late enough not to signify to her.  The temptation was
certainly great: she was very fond of the exercise, and the
gratification of riding on a fine horse, with Captain Lydgate, Sir
Godwin's son, on another fine horse by her side, and of being met in
this position by any one but her husband, was something as good as her
dreams before marriage: moreover she was riveting the connection with
the family at Quallingham, which must be a wise thing to do.

But the gentle gray, unprepared for the crash of a tree that was being
felled on the edge of Halsell wood, took fright, and caused a worse
fright to Rosamond, leading finally to the loss of her baby.  Lydgate
could not show his anger towards her, but he was rather bearish to the
Captain, whose visit naturally soon came to an end.

In all future conversations on the subject, Rosamond was mildly certain
that the ride had made no difference, and that if she had stayed at
home the same symptoms would have come on and would have ended in the
same way, because she had felt something like them before.

Lydgate could only say, "Poor, poor darling!"--but he secretly wondered
over the terrible tenacity of this mild creature.  There was gathering
within him an amazed sense of his powerlessness over Rosamond.  His
superior knowledge and mental force, instead of being, as he had
imagined, a shrine to consult on all occasions, was simply set aside on
every practical question.  He had regarded Rosamond's cleverness as
precisely of the receptive kind which became a woman.  He was now
beginning to find out what that cleverness was--what was the shape into
which it had run as into a close network aloof and independent.  No one
quicker than Rosamond to see causes and effects which lay within the
track of her own tastes and interests: she had seen clearly Lydgate's
preeminence in Middlemarch society, and could go on imaginatively
tracing still more agreeable social effects when his talent should have
advanced him; but for her, his professional and scientific ambition had
no other relation to these desirable effects than if they had been the
fortunate discovery of an ill-smelling oil.  And that oil apart, with
which she had nothing to do, of course she believed in her own opinion
more than she did in his.  Lydgate was astounded to find in numberless
trifling matters, as well as in this last serious case of the riding,
that affection did not make her compliant.  He had no doubt that the
affection was there, and had no presentiment that he had done anything
to repel it.  For his own part he said to himself that he loved her as
tenderly as ever, and could make up his mind to her negations;
but--well!  Lydgate was much worried, and conscious of new elements in
his life as noxious to him as an inlet of mud to a creature that has
been used to breathe and bathe and dart after its illuminated prey in
the clearest of waters.

Rosamond was soon looking lovelier than ever at her worktable, enjoying
drives in her father's phaeton and thinking it likely that she might be
invited to Quallingham.  She knew that she was a much more exquisite
ornament to the drawing-room there than any daughter of the family, and
in reflecting that the gentlemen were aware of that, did not perhaps
sufficiently consider whether the ladies would be eager to see
themselves surpassed.

Lydgate, relieved from anxiety about her, relapsed into what she
inwardly called his moodiness--a name which to her covered his
thoughtful preoccupation with other subjects than herself, as well as
that uneasy look of the brow and distaste for all ordinary things as if
they were mixed with bitter herbs, which really made a sort of
weather-glass to his vexation and foreboding.  These latter states of
mind had one cause amongst others, which he had generously but
mistakenly avoided mentioning to Rosamond, lest it should affect her
health and spirits.  Between him and her indeed there was that total
missing of each other's mental track, which is too evidently possible
even between persons who are continually thinking of each other.  To
Lydgate it seemed that he had been spending month after month in
sacrificing more than half of his best intent and best power to his
tenderness for Rosamond; bearing her little claims and interruptions
without impatience, and, above all, bearing without betrayal of
bitterness to look through less and less of interfering illusion at the
blank unreflecting surface her mind presented to his ardor for the more
impersonal ends of his profession and his scientific study, an ardor
which he had fancied that the ideal wife must somehow worship as
sublime, though not in the least knowing why.  But his endurance was
mingled with a self-discontent which, if we know how to be candid, we
shall confess to make more than half our bitterness under grievances,
wife or husband included.  It always remains true that if we had been
greater, circumstance would have been less strong against us.  Lydgate
was aware that his concessions to Rosamond were often little more than
the lapse of slackening resolution, the creeping paralysis apt to seize
an enthusiasm which is out of adjustment to a constant portion of our
lives.  And on Lydgate's enthusiasm there was constantly pressing not a
simple weight of sorrow, but the biting presence of a petty degrading
care, such as casts the blight of irony over all higher effort.

This was the care which he had hitherto abstained from mentioning to
Rosamond; and he believed, with some wonder, that it had never entered
her mind, though certainly no difficulty could be less mysterious.  It
was an inference with a conspicuous handle to it, and had been easily
drawn by indifferent observers, that Lydgate was in debt; and he could
not succeed in keeping out of his mind for long together that he was
every day getting deeper into that swamp, which tempts men towards it
with such a pretty covering of flowers and verdure.  It is wonderful
how soon a man gets up to his chin there--in a condition in which,
in spite of himself, he is forced to think chiefly of release, though he
had a scheme of the universe in his soul.

Eighteen months ago Lydgate was poor, but had never known the eager
want of small sums, and felt rather a burning contempt for any one who
descended a step in order to gain them.  He was now experiencing
something worse than a simple deficit: he was assailed by the vulgar
hateful trials of a man who has bought and used a great many things
which might have been done without, and which he is unable to pay for,
though the demand for payment has become pressing.

How this came about may be easily seen without much arithmetic or
knowledge of prices.  When a man in setting up a house and preparing
for marriage finds that his furniture and other initial expenses come
to between four and five hundred pounds more than he has capital to pay
for; when at the end of a year it appears that his household expenses,
horses and et caeteras, amount to nearly a thousand, while the proceeds
of the practice reckoned from the old books to be worth eight hundred
per annum have sunk like a summer pond and make hardly five hundred,
chiefly in unpaid entries, the plain inference is that, whether he
minds it or not, he is in debt.  Those were less expensive times than
our own, and provincial life was comparatively modest; but the ease
with which a medical man who had lately bought a practice, who thought
that he was obliged to keep two horses, whose table was supplied
without stint, and who paid an insurance on his life and a high rent
for house and garden, might find his expenses doubling his receipts,
can be conceived by any one who does not think these details beneath
his consideration.  Rosamond, accustomed from her childhood to an extravagant
household, thought that good housekeeping consisted simply in ordering
the best of everything--nothing else "answered;" and Lydgate supposed
that "if things were done at all, they must be done properly"--he did
not see how they were to live otherwise.  If each head of household
expenditure had been mentioned to him beforehand, he would have
probably observed that "it could hardly come to much," and if any one
had suggested a saving on a particular article--for example, the
substitution of cheap fish for dear--it would have appeared to him
simply a penny-wise, mean notion.  Rosamond, even without such an
occasion as Captain Lydgate's visit, was fond of giving invitations,
and Lydgate, though he often thought the guests tiresome, did not
interfere.  This sociability seemed a necessary part of professional
prudence, and the entertainment must be suitable.  It is true Lydgate
was constantly visiting the homes of the poor and adjusting his
prescriptions of diet to their small means; but, dear me! has it not by
this time ceased to be remarkable--is it not rather that we expect in
men, that they should have numerous strands of experience lying side by
side and never compare them with each other?  Expenditure--like
ugliness and errors--becomes a totally new thing when we attach our own
personality to it, and measure it by that wide difference which is
manifest (in our own sensations) between ourselves and others.  Lydgate
believed himself to be careless about his dress, and he despised a man
who calculated the effects of his costume; it seemed to him only a
matter of course that he had abundance of fresh garments--such things
were naturally ordered in sheaves.  It must be remembered that he had
never hitherto felt the check of importunate debt, and he walked by
habit, not by self-criticism.  But the check had come.

Its novelty made it the more irritating.  He was amazed, disgusted that
conditions so foreign to all his purposes, so hatefully disconnected
with the objects he cared to occupy himself with, should have lain in
ambush and clutched him when he was unaware.  And there was not only
the actual debt; there was the certainty that in his present position
he must go on deepening it.  Two furnishing tradesmen at Brassing,
whose bills had been incurred before his marriage, and whom
uncalculated current expenses had ever since prevented him from paying,
had repeatedly sent him unpleasant letters which had forced themselves
on his attention.  This could hardly have been more galling to any
disposition than to Lydgate's, with his intense pride--his dislike of
asking a favor or being under an obligation to any one.  He had scorned
even to form conjectures about Mr. Vincy's intentions on money matters,
and nothing but extremity could have induced him to apply to his
father-in-law, even if he had not been made aware in various indirect
ways since his marriage that Mr. Vincy's own affairs were not
flourishing, and that the expectation of help from him would be
resented.  Some men easily trust in the readiness of friends; it had
never in the former part of his life occurred to Lydgate that he should
need to do so: he had never thought what borrowing would be to him; but
now that the idea had entered his mind, he felt that he would rather
incur any other hardship.  In the mean time he had no money or
prospects of money; and his practice was not getting more lucrative.

No wonder that Lydgate had been unable to suppress all signs of inward
trouble during the last few months, and now that Rosamond was regaining
brilliant health, he meditated taking her entirely into confidence on
his difficulties.  New conversance with tradesmen's bills had forced
his reasoning into a new channel of comparison: he had begun to
consider from a new point of view what was necessary and unnecessary in
goods ordered, and to see that there must be some change of habits.
How could such a change be made without Rosamond's concurrence?  The
immediate occasion of opening the disagreeable fact to her was forced
upon him.

Having no money, and having privately sought advice as to what security
could possibly be given by a man in his position, Lydgate had offered
the one good security in his power to the less peremptory creditor, who
was a silversmith and jeweller, and who consented to take on himself
the upholsterer's credit also, accepting interest for a given term.
The security necessary was a bill of sale on the furniture of his
house, which might make a creditor easy for a reasonable time about a
debt amounting to less than four hundred pounds; and the silversmith,
Mr. Dover, was willing to reduce it by taking back a portion of the
plate and any other article which was as good as new.  "Any other
article" was a phrase delicately implying jewellery, and more
particularly some purple amethysts costing thirty pounds, which Lydgate
had bought as a bridal present.

Opinions may be divided as to his wisdom in making this present: some
may think that it was a graceful attention to be expected from a man
like Lydgate, and that the fault of any troublesome consequences lay in
the pinched narrowness of provincial life at that time, which offered
no conveniences for professional people whose fortune was not
proportioned to their tastes; also, in Lydgate's ridiculous
fastidiousness about asking his friends for money.

However, it had seemed a question of no moment to him on that fine
morning when he went to give a final order for plate: in the presence
of other jewels enormously expensive, and as an addition to orders of
which the amount had not been exactly calculated, thirty pounds for
ornaments so exquisitely suited to Rosamond's neck and arms could
hardly appear excessive when there was no ready cash for it to exceed.
But at this crisis Lydgate's imagination could not help dwelling on the
possibility of letting the amethysts take their place again among Mr.
Dover's stock, though he shrank from the idea of proposing this to
Rosamond.  Having been roused to discern consequences which he had
never been in the habit of tracing, he was preparing to act on this
discernment with some of the rigor (by no means all) that he would have
applied in pursuing experiment.  He was nerving himself to this rigor
as he rode from Brassing, and meditated on the representations he must
make to Rosamond.

It was evening when he got home.  He was intensely miserable, this
strong man of nine-and-twenty and of many gifts.  He was not saying
angrily within himself that he had made a profound mistake; but the
mistake was at work in him like a recognized chronic disease, mingling
its uneasy importunities with every prospect, and enfeebling every
thought.  As he went along the passage to the drawing-room, he heard
the piano and singing.  Of course, Ladislaw was there.  It was some
weeks since Will had parted from Dorothea, yet he was still at the old
post in Middlemarch.  Lydgate had no objection in general to Ladislaw's
coming, but just now he was annoyed that he could not find his hearth
free.  When he opened the door the two singers went on towards the
key-note, raising their eyes and looking at him indeed, but not
regarding his entrance as an interruption.  To a man galled with his
harness as poor Lydgate was, it is not soothing to see two people
warbling at him, as he comes in with the sense that the painful day has
still pains in store.  His face, already paler than usual, took on a
scowl as he walked across the room and flung himself into a chair.

The singers feeling themselves excused by the fact that they had only
three bars to sing, now turned round.

"How are you, Lydgate?" said Will, coming forward to shake hands.

Lydgate took his hand, but did not think it necessary to speak.

"Have you dined, Tertius?  I expected you much earlier," said Rosamond,
who had already seen that her husband was in a "horrible humor." She
seated herself in her usual place as she spoke.

"I have dined.  I should like some tea, please," said Lydgate, curtly,
still scowling and looking markedly at his legs stretched out before
him.

Will was too quick to need more.  "I shall be off," he said, reaching
his hat.

"Tea is coming," said Rosamond; "pray don't go."

"Yes, Lydgate is bored," said Will, who had more comprehension of
Lydgate than Rosamond had, and was not offended by his manner, easily
imagining outdoor causes of annoyance.

"There is the more need for you to stay," said Rosamond, playfully, and
in her lightest accent; "he will not speak to me all the evening."

"Yes, Rosamond, I shall," said Lydgate, in his strong baritone.  "I
have some serious business to speak to you about."

No introduction of the business could have been less like that which
Lydgate had intended; but her indifferent manner had been too provoking.

"There! you see," said Will.  "I'm going to the meeting about the
Mechanics' Institute.  Good-by;" and he went quickly out of the room.

Rosamond did not look at her husband, but presently rose and took her
place before the tea-tray. She was thinking that she had never seen him
so disagreeable.  Lydgate turned his dark eyes on her and watched her
as she delicately handled the tea-service with her taper fingers, and
looked at the objects immediately before her with no curve in her face
disturbed, and yet with an ineffable protest in her air against all
people with unpleasant manners.  For the moment he lost the sense of
his wound in a sudden speculation about this new form of feminine
impassibility revealing itself in the sylph-like frame which he had
once interpreted as the sign of a ready intelligent sensitiveness.  His
mind glancing back to Laure while he looked at Rosamond, he said
inwardly, "Would _she_ kill me because I wearied her?" and then, "It is
the way with all women." But this power of generalizing which gives men
so much the superiority in mistake over the dumb animals, was
immediately thwarted by Lydgate's memory of wondering impressions from
the behavior of another woman--from Dorothea's looks and tones of
emotion about her husband when Lydgate began to attend him--from her
passionate cry to be taught what would best comfort that man for whose
sake it seemed as if she must quell every impulse in her except the
yearnings of faithfulness and compassion.  These revived impressions
succeeded each other quickly and dreamily in Lydgate's mind while the
tea was being brewed.  He had shut his eyes in the last instant of
reverie while he heard Dorothea saying, "Advise me--think what I can
do--he has been all his life laboring and looking forward.  He minds
about nothing else--and I mind about nothing else."

That voice of deep-souled womanhood had remained within him as the
enkindling conceptions of dead and sceptred genius had remained within
him (is there not a genius for feeling nobly which also reigns over
human spirits and their conclusions?); the tones were a music from
which he was falling away--he had really fallen into a momentary doze,
when Rosamond said in her silvery neutral way, "Here is your tea,
Tertius," setting it on the small table by his side, and then moved
back to her place without looking at him.  Lydgate was too hasty in
attributing insensibility to her; after her own fashion, she was
sensitive enough, and took lasting impressions.  Her impression now was
one of offence and repulsion.  But then, Rosamond had no scowls and had
never raised her voice: she was quite sure that no one could justly
find fault with her.

Perhaps Lydgate and she had never felt so far off each other before;
but there were strong reasons for not deferring his revelation, even if
he had not already begun it by that abrupt announcement; indeed some of
the angry desire to rouse her into more sensibility on his account
which had prompted him to speak prematurely, still mingled with his
pain in the prospect of her pain.  But he waited till the tray was
gone, the candles were lit, and the evening quiet might be counted on:
the interval had left time for repelled tenderness to return into the
old course.  He spoke kindly.

"Dear Rosy, lay down your work and come to sit by me," he said, gently,
pushing away the table, and stretching out his arm to draw a chair near
his own.

Rosamond obeyed.  As she came towards him in her drapery of transparent
faintly tinted muslin, her slim yet round figure never looked more
graceful; as she sat down by him and laid one hand on the elbow of his
chair, at last looking at him and meeting his eyes, her delicate neck
and cheek and purely cut lips never had more of that untarnished beauty
which touches as in spring-time and infancy and all sweet freshness.
It touched Lydgate now, and mingled the early moments of his love for
her with all the other memories which were stirred in this crisis of
deep trouble.  He laid his ample hand softly on hers, saying--

"Dear!" with the lingering utterance which affection gives to the word.
Rosamond too was still under the power of that same past, and her
husband was still in part the Lydgate whose approval had stirred
delight.  She put his hair lightly away from his forehead, then laid
her other hand on his, and was conscious of forgiving him.

"I am obliged to tell you what will hurt you, Rosy.  But there are
things which husband and wife must think of together.  I dare say it
has occurred to you already that I am short of money."

Lydgate paused; but Rosamond turned her neck and looked at a vase on
the mantel-piece.

"I was not able to pay for all the things we had to get before we were
married, and there have been expenses since which I have been obliged
to meet.  The consequence is, there is a large debt at Brassing--three
hundred and eighty pounds--which has been pressing on me a good while,
and in fact we are getting deeper every day, for people don't pay me
the faster because others want the money.  I took pains to keep it from
you while you were not well; but now we must think together about it,
and you must help me."

"What can--I--do, Tertius?" said Rosamond, turning her eyes on him
again.  That little speech of four words, like so many others in all
languages, is capable by varied vocal inflections of expressing all
states of mind from helpless dimness to exhaustive argumentative
perception, from the completest self-devoting fellowship to the most
neutral aloofness.  Rosamond's thin utterance threw into the words
"What can--I--do!" as much neutrality as they could hold.  They fell
like a mortal chill on Lydgate's roused tenderness.  He did not storm
in indignation--he felt too sad a sinking of the heart.  And when he
spoke again it was more in the tone of a man who forces himself to
fulfil a task.

"It is necessary for you to know, because I have to give security for a
time, and a man must come to make an inventory of the furniture."

Rosamond colored deeply.  "Have you not asked papa for money?" she
said, as soon as she could speak.

"No."

"Then I must ask him!" she said, releasing her hands from Lydgate's,
and rising to stand at two yards' distance from him.

"No, Rosy," said Lydgate, decisively.  "It is too late to do that.  The
inventory will be begun to-morrow. Remember it is a mere security: it
will make no difference: it is a temporary affair.  I insist upon it
that your father shall not know, unless I choose to tell him," added
Lydgate, with a more peremptory emphasis.

This certainly was unkind, but Rosamond had thrown him back on evil
expectation as to what she would do in the way of quiet steady
disobedience.  The unkindness seemed unpardonable to her: she was not
given to weeping and disliked it, but now her chin and lips began to
tremble and the tears welled up.  Perhaps it was not possible for
Lydgate, under the double stress of outward material difficulty and of
his own proud resistance to humiliating consequences, to imagine fully
what this sudden trial was to a young creature who had known nothing
but indulgence, and whose dreams had all been of new indulgence, more
exactly to her taste.  But he did wish to spare her as much as he
could, and her tears cut him to the heart.  He could not speak again
immediately; but Rosamond did not go on sobbing: she tried to conquer
her agitation and wiped away her tears, continuing to look before her
at the mantel-piece.

"Try not to grieve, darling," said Lydgate, turning his eyes up towards
her.  That she had chosen to move away from him in this moment of her
trouble made everything harder to say, but he must absolutely go on.
"We must brace ourselves to do what is necessary.  It is I who have
been in fault: I ought to have seen that I could not afford to live in
this way. But many things have told against me in my practice, and it
really just now has ebbed to a low point.  I may recover it, but in the
mean time we must pull up--we must change our way of living.  We shall
weather it.  When I have given this security I shall have time to look
about me; and you are so clever that if you turn your mind to managing
you will school me into carefulness.  I have been a thoughtless rascal
about squaring prices--but come, dear, sit down and forgive me."

Lydgate was bowing his neck under the yoke like a creature who had
talons, but who had Reason too, which often reduces us to meekness.
When he had spoken the last words in an imploring tone, Rosamond
returned to the chair by his side.  His self-blame gave her some hope
that he would attend to her opinion, and she said--

"Why can you not put off having the inventory made?  You can send the
men away to-morrow when they come."

"I shall not send them away," said Lydgate, the peremptoriness rising
again.  Was it of any use to explain?

"If we left Middlemarch? there would of course be a sale, and that
would do as well."

"But we are not going to leave Middlemarch."

"I am sure, Tertius, it would be much better to do so.  Why can we not
go to London?  Or near Durham, where your family is known?"

"We can go nowhere without money, Rosamond."

"Your friends would not wish you to be without money.  And surely these
odious tradesmen might be made to understand that, and to wait, if you
would make proper representations to them."

"This is idle Rosamond," said Lydgate, angrily.  "You must learn to
take my judgment on questions you don't understand.  I have made
necessary arrangements, and they must be carried out.  As to friends, I
have no expectations whatever from them, and shall not ask them for
anything."

Rosamond sat perfectly still.  The thought in her mind was that if she
had known how Lydgate would behave, she would never have married him.

"We have no time to waste now on unnecessary words, dear," said
Lydgate, trying to be gentle again.  "There are some details that I
want to consider with you.  Dover says he will take a good deal of the
plate back again, and any of the jewellery we like.  He really behaves
very well."

"Are we to go without spoons and forks then?" said Rosamond, whose very
lips seemed to get thinner with the thinness of her utterance.  She was
determined to make no further resistance or suggestions.

"Oh no, dear!" said Lydgate.  "But look here," he continued, drawing a
paper from his pocket and opening it; "here is Dover's account.  See, I
have marked a number of articles, which if we returned them would
reduce the amount by thirty pounds and more.  I have not marked any
of the jewellery."  Lydgate had really felt this point of the jewellery
very bitter to himself; but he had overcome the feeling by severe
argument.  He could not propose to Rosamond that she should return any
particular present of his, but he had told himself that he was bound to
put Dover's offer before her, and her inward prompting might make the
affair easy.

"It is useless for me to look, Tertius," said Rosamond, calmly; "you
will return what you please."  She would not turn her eyes on the
paper, and Lydgate, flushing up to the roots of his hair, drew it back
and let it fall on his knee.  Meanwhile Rosamond quietly went out of
the room, leaving Lydgate helpless and wondering.  Was she not coming
back?  It seemed that she had no more identified herself with him than
if they had been creatures of different species and opposing interests.
He tossed his head and thrust his hands deep into his pockets with a
sort of vengeance.  There was still science--there were still good
objects to work for.  He must give a tug still--all the stronger
because other satisfactions were going.

But the door opened and Rosamond re-entered. She carried the leather
box containing the amethysts, and a tiny ornamental basket which
contained other boxes, and laying them on the chair where she had been
sitting, she said, with perfect propriety in her air--

"This is all the jewellery you ever gave me.  You can return what you
like of it, and of the plate also.  You will not, of course, expect me
to stay at home to-morrow. I shall go to papa's."

To many women the look Lydgate cast at her would have been more
terrible than one of anger: it had in it a despairing acceptance of the
distance she was placing between them.

"And when shall you come back again?" he said, with a bitter edge on
his accent.

"Oh, in the evening.  Of course I shall not mention the subject to
mamma."  Rosamond was convinced that no woman could behave more
irreproachably than she was behaving; and she went to sit down at her
work-table. Lydgate sat meditating a minute or two, and the result was
that he said, with some of the old emotion in his tone--

"Now we have been united, Rosy, you should not leave me to myself in
the first trouble that has come."

"Certainly not," said Rosamond; "I shall do everything it becomes me to
do."

"It is not right that the thing should be left to servants, or that I
should have to speak to them about it.  And I shall be obliged to go
out--I don't know how early.  I understand your shrinking from the
humiliation of these money affairs.  But, my dear Rosamond, as a
question of pride, which I feel just as much as you can, it is surely
better to manage the thing ourselves, and let the servants see as
little of it as possible; and since you are my wife, there is no
hindering your share in my disgraces--if there were disgraces."

Rosamond did not answer immediately, but at last she said, "Very well,
I will stay at home."

"I shall not touch these jewels, Rosy.  Take them away again.  But I
will write out a list of plate that we may return, and that can be
packed up and sent at once."

"The servants will know _that_," said Rosamond, with the slightest
touch of sarcasm.

"Well, we must meet some disagreeables as necessities.  Where is the
ink, I wonder?" said Lydgate, rising, and throwing the account on the
larger table where he meant to write.

Rosamond went to reach the inkstand, and after setting it on the table
was going to turn away, when Lydgate, who was standing close by, put
his arm round her and drew her towards him, saying--

"Come, darling, let us make the best of things.  It will only be for a
time, I hope, that we shall have to be stingy and particular.  Kiss me."

His native warm-heartedness took a great deal of quenching, and it is a
part of manliness for a husband to feel keenly the fact that an
inexperienced girl has got into trouble by marrying him.  She received
his kiss and returned it faintly, and in this way an appearance of
accord was recovered for the time.  But Lydgate could not help looking
forward with dread to the inevitable future discussions about
expenditure and the necessity for a complete change in their way of
living.



CHAPTER LIX.

    They said of old the Soul had human shape,
    But smaller, subtler than the fleshly self,
    So wandered forth for airing when it pleased.
    And see! beside her cherub-face there floats
    A pale-lipped form aerial whispering
    Its promptings in that little shell her ear."


News is often dispersed as thoughtlessly and effectively as that pollen
which the bees carry off (having no idea how powdery they are) when
they are buzzing in search of their particular nectar.  This fine
comparison has reference to Fred Vincy, who on that evening at Lowick
Parsonage heard a lively discussion among the ladies on the news which
their old servant had got from Tantripp concerning Mr. Casaubon's
strange mention of Mr. Ladislaw in a codicil to his will made not long
before his death.  Miss Winifred was astounded to find that her brother
had known the fact before, and observed that Camden was the most
wonderful man for knowing things and not telling them; whereupon Mary
Garth said that the codicil had perhaps got mixed up with the habits of
spiders, which Miss Winifred never would listen to.  Mrs. Farebrother
considered that the news had something to do with their having only
once seen Mr. Ladislaw at Lowick, and Miss Noble made many small
compassionate mewings.

Fred knew little and cared less about Ladislaw and the Casaubons, and
his mind never recurred to that discussion till one day calling on
Rosamond at his mother's request to deliver a message as he passed, he
happened to see Ladislaw going away.  Fred and Rosamond had little to
say to each other now that marriage had removed her from collision with
the unpleasantness of brothers, and especially now that he had taken
what she held the stupid and even reprehensible step of giving up the
Church to take to such a business as Mr. Garth's. Hence Fred talked by
preference of what he considered indifferent news, and "a propos of
that young Ladislaw" mentioned what he had heard at Lowick Parsonage.

Now Lydgate, like Mr. Farebrother, knew a great deal more than he told,
and when he had once been set thinking about the relation between Will
and Dorothea his conjectures had gone beyond the fact.  He imagined
that there was a passionate attachment on both sides, and this struck
him as much too serious to gossip about.  He remembered Will's
irritability when he had mentioned Mrs. Casaubon, and was the more
circumspect.  On the whole his surmises, in addition to what he knew of
the fact, increased his friendliness and tolerance towards Ladislaw,
and made him understand the vacillation which kept him at Middlemarch
after he had said that he should go away.  It was significant of the
separateness between Lydgate's mind and Rosamond's that he had no
impulse to speak to her on the subject; indeed, he did not quite trust
her reticence towards Will.  And he was right there; though he had no
vision of the way in which her mind would act in urging her to speak.

When she repeated Fred's news to Lydgate, he said, "Take care you don't
drop the faintest hint to Ladislaw, Rosy.  He is likely to fly out as
if you insulted him.  Of course it is a painful affair."

Rosamond turned her neck and patted her hair, looking the image of
placid indifference.  But the next time Will came when Lydgate was
away, she spoke archly about his not going to London as he had
threatened.

"I know all about it.  I have a confidential little bird," said she,
showing very pretty airs of her head over the bit of work held high
between her active fingers.  "There is a powerful magnet in this
neighborhood."

"To be sure there is.  Nobody knows that better than you," said Will,
with light gallantry, but inwardly prepared to be angry.

"It is really the most charming romance: Mr. Casaubon jealous, and
foreseeing that there was no one else whom Mrs. Casaubon would so much
like to marry, and no one who would so much like to marry her as a
certain gentleman; and then laying a plan to spoil all by making her
forfeit her property if she did marry that gentleman--and then--and
then--and then--oh, I have no doubt the end will be thoroughly
romantic."

"Great God! what do you mean?" said Will, flushing over face and ears,
his features seeming to change as if he had had a violent shake.
"Don't joke; tell me what you mean."

"You don't really know?" said Rosamond, no longer playful, and desiring
nothing better than to tell in order that she might evoke effects.

"No!" he returned, impatiently.

"Don't know that Mr. Casaubon has left it in his will that if Mrs.
Casaubon marries you she is to forfeit all her property?"

"How do you know that it is true?" said Will, eagerly.

"My brother Fred heard it from the Farebrothers."  Will started up from
his chair and reached his hat.

"I dare say she likes you better than the property," said Rosamond,
looking at him from a distance.

"Pray don't say any more about it," said Will, in a hoarse undertone
extremely unlike his usual light voice.  "It is a foul insult to her
and to me."  Then he sat down absently, looking before him, but seeing
nothing.

"Now you are angry with _me_," said Rosamond.  "It is too bad to bear
_me_ malice.  You ought to be obliged to me for telling you."

"So I am," said Will, abruptly, speaking with that kind of double soul
which belongs to dreamers who answer questions.

"I expect to hear of the marriage," said Rosamond, playfully.

"Never!  You will never hear of the marriage!"

With those words uttered impetuously, Will rose, put out his hand to
Rosamond, still with the air of a somnambulist, and went away.

When he was gone, Rosamond left her chair and walked to the other end
of the room, leaning when she got there against a chiffonniere, and
looking out of the window wearily.  She was oppressed by ennui, and by
that dissatisfaction which in women's minds is continually turning into
a trivial jealousy, referring to no real claims, springing from no
deeper passion than the vague exactingness of egoism, and yet capable
of impelling action as well as speech.  "There really is nothing to
care for much," said poor Rosamond inwardly, thinking of the family at
Quallingham, who did not write to her; and that perhaps Tertius when he
came home would tease her about expenses.  She had already secretly
disobeyed him by asking her father to help them, and he had ended
decisively by saying, "I am more likely to want help myself."



CHAPTER LX.

    Good phrases are surely, and ever were, very commendable.
                                          --Justice Shallow.


A few days afterwards--it was already the end of August--there was an
occasion which caused some excitement in Middlemarch: the public, if it
chose, was to have the advantage of buying, under the distinguished
auspices of Mr. Borthrop Trumbull, the furniture, books, and pictures
which anybody might see by the handbills to be the best in every kind,
belonging to Edwin Larcher, Esq. This was not one of the sales
indicating the depression of trade; on the contrary, it was due to Mr.
Larcher's great success in the carrying business, which warranted his
purchase of a mansion near Riverston already furnished in high style by
an illustrious Spa physician--furnished indeed with such large
framefuls of expensive flesh-painting in the dining-room, that Mrs.
Larcher was nervous until reassured by finding the subjects to be
Scriptural.  Hence the fine opportunity to purchasers which was well
pointed out in the handbills of Mr. Borthrop Trumbull, whose
acquaintance with the history of art enabled him to state that the hall
furniture, to be sold without reserve, comprised a piece of carving by
a contemporary of Gibbons.

At Middlemarch in those times a large sale was regarded as a kind of
festival.  There was a table spread with the best cold eatables, as at
a superior funeral; and facilities were offered for that
generous-drinking of cheerful glasses which might lead to generous and
cheerful bidding for undesirable articles.  Mr. Larcher's sale was the
more attractive in the fine weather because the house stood just at the
end of the town, with a garden and stables attached, in that pleasant
issue from Middlemarch called the London Road, which was also the road
to the New Hospital and to Mr. Bulstrode's retired residence, known as
the Shrubs.  In short, the auction was as good as a fair, and drew all
classes with leisure at command: to some, who risked making bids in
order simply to raise prices, it was almost equal to betting at the
races.  The second day, when the best furniture was to be sold,
"everybody" was there; even Mr. Thesiger, the rector of St. Peter's,
had looked in for a short time, wishing to buy the carved table, and
had rubbed elbows with Mr. Bambridge and Mr. Horrock.  There was a
wreath of Middlemarch ladies accommodated with seats round the large
table in the dining-room, where Mr. Borthrop Trumbull was mounted with
desk and hammer; but the rows chiefly of masculine faces behind were
often varied by incomings and outgoings both from the door and the
large bow-window opening on to the lawn.

"Everybody" that day did not include Mr. Bulstrode, whose health could
not well endure crowds and draughts.  But Mrs. Bulstrode had
particularly wished to have a certain picture--a "Supper at Emmaus,"
attributed in the catalogue to Guido; and at the last moment before the
day of the sale Mr. Bulstrode had called at the office of the
"Pioneer," of which he was now one of the proprietors, to beg of Mr.
Ladislaw as a great favor that he would obligingly use his remarkable
knowledge of pictures on behalf of Mrs. Bulstrode, and judge of the
value of this particular painting--"if," added the scrupulously polite
banker, "attendance at the sale would not interfere with the
arrangements for your departure, which I know is imminent."

This proviso might have sounded rather satirically in Will's ear if he
had been in a mood to care about such satire.  It referred to an
understanding entered into many weeks before with the proprietors of
the paper, that he should be at liberty any day he pleased to hand over
the management to the subeditor whom he had been training; since he
wished finally to quit Middlemarch.  But indefinite visions of ambition
are weak against the ease of doing what is habitual or beguilingly
agreeable; and we all know the difficulty of carrying out a resolve
when we secretly long that it may turn out to be unnecessary.  In such
states of mind the most incredulous person has a private leaning
towards miracle: impossible to conceive how our wish could be
fulfilled, still--very wonderful things have happened!  Will did not
confess this weakness to himself, but he lingered.  What was the use of
going to London at that time of the year?  The Rugby men who would
remember him were not there; and so far as political writing was
concerned, he would rather for a few weeks go on with the "Pioneer."
At the present moment, however, when Mr. Bulstrode was speaking to him,
he had both a strengthened resolve to go and an equally strong resolve
not to go till he had once more seen Dorothea.  Hence he replied that
he had reasons for deferring his departure a little, and would be happy
to go to the sale.

Will was in a defiant mood, his consciousness being deeply stung with
the thought that the people who looked at him probably knew a fact
tantamount to an accusation against him as a fellow with low designs
which were to be frustrated by a disposal of property.  Like most
people who assert their freedom with regard to conventional
distinction, he was prepared to be sudden and quick at quarrel with any
one who might hint that he had personal reasons for that assertion--that
there was anything in his blood, his bearing, or his character to
which he gave the mask of an opinion.  When he was under an irritating
impression of this kind he would go about for days with a defiant look,
the color changing in his transparent skin as if he were on the qui
vive, watching for something which he had to dart upon.

This expression was peculiarly noticeable in him at the sale, and those
who had only seen him in his moods of gentle oddity or of bright
enjoyment would have been struck with a contrast.  He was not sorry to
have this occasion for appearing in public before the Middlemarch
tribes of Toller, Hackbutt, and the rest, who looked down on him as an
adventurer, and were in a state of brutal ignorance about Dante--who
sneered at his Polish blood, and were themselves of a breed very much
in need of crossing.  He stood in a conspicuous place not far from the
auctioneer, with a fore-finger in each side-pocket and his head thrown
backward, not caring to speak to anybody, though he had been cordially
welcomed as a connoiss_ure_ by Mr. Trumbull, who was enjoying the
utmost activity of his great faculties.

And surely among all men whose vocation requires them to exhibit their
powers of speech, the happiest is a prosperous provincial auctioneer
keenly alive to his own jokes and sensible of his encyclopedic
knowledge.  Some saturnine, sour-blooded persons might object to be
constantly insisting on the merits of all articles from boot-jacks to
"Berghems;" but Mr. Borthrop Trumbull had a kindly liquid in his veins;
he was an admirer by nature, and would have liked to have the universe
under his hammer, feeling that it would go at a higher figure for his
recommendation.

Meanwhile Mrs. Larcher's drawing-room furniture was enough for him.
When Will Ladislaw had come in, a second fender, said to have been
forgotten in its right place, suddenly claimed the auctioneer's
enthusiasm, which he distributed on the equitable principle of praising
those things most which were most in need of praise.  The fender was of
polished steel, with much lancet-shaped open-work and a sharp edge.

"Now, ladies," said he, "I shall appeal to you.  Here is a fender which
at any other sale would hardly be offered with out reserve, being, as I
may say, for quality of steel and quaintness of design, a kind of
thing"--here Mr. Trumbull dropped his voice and became slightly nasal,
trimming his outlines with his left finger--"that might not fall in
with ordinary tastes.  Allow me to tell you that by-and-by this style
of workmanship will be the only one in vogue--half-a-crown, you said?
thank you--going at half-a-crown, this characteristic fender; and I
have particular information that the antique style is very much sought
after in high quarters.  Three shillings--three-and-sixpence--hold it
well up, Joseph!  Look, ladies, at the chastity of the design--I have
no doubt myself that it was turned out in the last century!  Four
shillings, Mr. Mawmsey?--four shillings."

"It's not a thing I would put in _my_ drawing-room," said Mrs. Mawmsey,
audibly, for the warning of the rash husband.  "I wonder _at_ Mrs.
Larcher.  Every blessed child's head that fell against it would be cut
in two.  The edge is like a knife."

"Quite true," rejoined Mr. Trumbull, quickly, "and most uncommonly
useful to have a fender at hand that will cut, if you have a leather
shoe-tie or a bit of string that wants cutting and no knife at hand:
many a man has been left hanging because there was no knife to cut him
down.  Gentlemen, here's a fender that if you had the misfortune to
hang yourselves would cut you down in no time--with astonishing
celerity--four-and-sixpence--five--five-and-sixpence--an appropriate
thing for a spare bedroom where there was a four-poster and a guest a
little out of his mind--six shillings--thank you, Mr. Clintup--going
at six shillings--going--gone!"  The auctioneer's glance, which had
been searching round him with a preternatural susceptibility to all
signs of bidding, here dropped on the paper before him, and his voice
too dropped into a tone of indifferent despatch as he said, "Mr.
Clintup.  Be handy, Joseph."

"It was worth six shillings to have a fender you could always tell that
joke on," said Mr. Clintup, laughing low and apologetically to his next
neighbor.  He was a diffident though distinguished nurseryman, and
feared that the audience might regard his bid as a foolish one.

Meanwhile Joseph had brought a trayful of small articles.  "Now,
ladies," said Mr. Trumbull, taking up one of the articles, "this tray
contains a very recherchy lot--a collection of trifles for the
drawing-room table--and trifles make the sum _of_ human things--nothing
more important than trifles--(yes, Mr. Ladislaw, yes, by-and-by)--but
pass the tray round, Joseph--these bijoux must be examined, ladies.
This I have in my hand is an ingenious contrivance--a sort of
practical rebus, I may call it: here, you see, it looks like an elegant
heart-shaped box, portable--for the pocket; there, again, it becomes
like a splendid double flower--an ornament for the table; and now"--Mr.
Trumbull allowed the flower to fall alarmingly into strings of
heart-shaped leaves--"a book of riddles!  No less than five hundred
printed in a beautiful red.  Gentlemen, if I had less of a conscience,
I should not wish you to bid high for this lot--I have a longing for
it myself.  What can promote innocent mirth, and I may say virtue, more
than a good riddle?--it hinders profane language, and attaches a man to
the society of refined females.  This ingenious article itself, without
the elegant domino-box, card-basket, &c., ought alone to give a high
price to the lot.  Carried in the pocket it might make an individual
welcome in any society.  Four shillings, sir?--four shillings for this
remarkable collection of riddles with the et caeteras.  Here is a
sample: 'How must you spell honey to make it catch lady-birds?
Answer--money.'  You hear?--lady-birds--honey money.  This is an
amusement to sharpen the intellect; it has a sting--it has what we call
satire, and wit without indecency.  Four-and-sixpence--five shillings."

The bidding ran on with warming rivalry.  Mr. Bowyer was a bidder, and
this was too exasperating.  Bowyer couldn't afford it, and only wanted
to hinder every other man from making a figure.  The current carried
even Mr. Horrock with it, but this committal of himself to an opinion
fell from him with so little sacrifice of his neutral expression, that
the bid might not have been detected as his but for the friendly oaths
of Mr. Bambridge, who wanted to know what Horrock would do with blasted
stuff only fit for haberdashers given over to that state of perdition
which the horse-dealer so cordially recognized in the majority of
earthly existences.  The lot was finally knocked down at a guinea to
Mr. Spilkins, a young Slender of the neighborhood, who was reckless
with his pocket-money and felt his want of memory for riddles.

"Come, Trumbull, this is too bad--you've been putting some old maid's
rubbish into the sale," murmured Mr. Toller, getting close to the
auctioneer.  "I want to see how the prints go, and I must be off soon."

"_Im_mediately, Mr. Toller.  It was only an act of benevolence which
your noble heart would approve.  Joseph! quick with the prints--Lot
235.  Now, gentlemen, you who are connoiss_ures_, you are going to have
a treat.  Here is an engraving of the Duke of Wellington surrounded by
his staff on the Field of Waterloo; and notwithstanding recent events
which have, as it were, enveloped our great Hero in a cloud, I will be
bold to say--for a man in my line must not be blown about by political
winds--that a finer subject--of the modern order, belonging to our own
time and epoch--the understanding of man could hardly conceive: angels
might, perhaps, but not men, sirs, not men."

"Who painted it?" said Mr. Powderell, much impressed.

"It is a proof before the letter, Mr. Powderell--the painter is not
known," answered Trumbull, with a certain gaspingness in his last
words, after which he pursed up his lips and stared round him.

"I'll bid a pound!" said Mr. Powderell, in a tone of resolved emotion,
as of a man ready to put himself in the breach.  Whether from awe or
pity, nobody raised the price on him.

Next came two Dutch prints which Mr. Toller had been eager for, and
after he had secured them he went away.  Other prints, and afterwards
some paintings, were sold to leading Middlemarchers who had come with a
special desire for them, and there was a more active movement of the
audience in and out; some, who had bought what they wanted, going away,
others coming in either quite newly or from a temporary visit to the
refreshments which were spread under the marquee on the lawn.  It was
this marquee that Mr. Bambridge was bent on buying, and he appeared to
like looking inside it frequently, as a foretaste of its possession.
On the last occasion of his return from it he was observed to bring
with him a new companion, a stranger to Mr. Trumbull and every one
else, whose appearance, however, led to the supposition that he might
be a relative of the horse-dealer's--also "given to indulgence."  His
large whiskers, imposing swagger, and swing of the leg, made him a
striking figure; but his suit of black, rather shabby at the edges,
caused the prejudicial inference that he was not able to afford himself
as much indulgence as he liked.

"Who is it you've picked up, Bam?" said Mr. Horrock, aside.

"Ask him yourself," returned Mr. Bambridge.  "He said he'd just turned
in from the road."

Mr. Horrock eyed the stranger, who was leaning back against his stick
with one hand, using his toothpick with the other, and looking about
him with a certain restlessness apparently under the silence imposed on
him by circumstances.

At length the "Supper at Emmaus" was brought forward, to Will's immense
relief, for he was getting so tired of the proceedings that he had
drawn back a little and leaned his shoulder against the wall just
behind the auctioneer.  He now came forward again, and his eye caught
the conspicuous stranger, who, rather to his surprise, was staring at
him markedly.  But Will was immediately appealed to by Mr. Trumbull.

"Yes, Mr. Ladislaw, yes; this interests you as a connoiss_ure_, I
think.  It is some pleasure," the auctioneer went on with a rising
fervor, "to have a picture like this to show to a company of ladies and
gentlemen--a picture worth any sum to an individual whose means were on
a level with his judgment.  It is a painting of the Italian school--by
the celebrated Guydo, the greatest painter in the world, the chief of
the Old Masters, as they are called--I take it, because they were up
to a thing or two beyond most of us--in possession of secrets now lost
to the bulk of mankind.  Let me tell you, gentlemen, I have seen a
great many pictures by the Old Masters, and they are not all up to this
mark--some of them are darker than you might like and not family
subjects.  But here is a Guydo--the frame alone is worth pounds--which
any lady might be proud to hang up--a suitable thing for what we call a
refectory in a charitable institution, if any gentleman of the
Corporation wished to show his munifi_cence_. Turn it a little, sir?
yes.  Joseph, turn it a little towards Mr. Ladislaw--Mr. Ladislaw,
having been abroad, understands the merit of these things, you observe."

All eyes were for a moment turned towards Will, who said, coolly, "Five
pounds."  The auctioneer burst out in deep remonstrance.

"Ah!  Mr. Ladislaw! the frame alone is worth that.  Ladies and
gentlemen, for the credit of the town!  Suppose it should be discovered
hereafter that a gem of art has been amongst us in this town, and
nobody in Middlemarch awake to it.  Five guineas--five seven-six--five
ten.  Still, ladies, still!  It is a gem, and 'Full many a gem,' as the
poet says, has been allowed to go at a nominal price because the public
knew no better, because it was offered in circles where there was--I
was going to say a low feeling, but no!--Six pounds--six guineas--a
Guydo of the first order going at six guineas--it is an insult to
religion, ladies; it touches us all as Christians, gentlemen, that a
subject like this should go at such a low figure--six pounds
ten--seven--"

The bidding was brisk, and Will continued to share in it, remembering
that Mrs. Bulstrode had a strong wish for the picture, and thinking
that he might stretch the price to twelve pounds.  But it was knocked
down to him at ten guineas, whereupon he pushed his way towards the
bow-window and went out.  He chose to go under the marquee to get a
glass of water, being hot and thirsty: it was empty of other visitors,
and he asked the woman in attendance to fetch him some fresh water; but
before she was well gone he was annoyed to see entering the florid
stranger who had stared at him.  It struck Will at this moment that the
man might be one of those political parasitic insects of the bloated
kind who had once or twice claimed acquaintance with him as having
heard him speak on the Reform question, and who might think of getting
a shilling by news.  In this light his person, already rather heating
to behold on a summer's day, appeared the more disagreeable; and Will,
half-seated on the elbow of a garden-chair, turned his eyes carefully
away from the comer.  But this signified little to our acquaintance Mr.
Raffles, who never hesitated to thrust himself on unwilling
observation, if it suited his purpose to do so.  He moved a step or two
till he was in front of Will, and said with full-mouthed haste, "Excuse
me, Mr. Ladislaw--was your mother's name Sarah Dunkirk?"

Will, starting to his feet, moved backward a step, frowning, and saying
with some fierceness, "Yes, sir, it was.  And what is that to you?"

It was in Will's nature that the first spark it threw out was a direct
answer of the question and a challenge of the consequences.  To have
said, "What is that to you?" in the first instance, would have seemed
like shuffling--as if he minded who knew anything about his origin!

Raffles on his side had not the same eagerness for a collision which
was implied in Ladislaw's threatening air.  The slim young fellow with
his girl's complexion looked like a tiger-cat ready to spring on him.
Under such circumstances Mr. Raffles's pleasure in annoying his company
was kept in abeyance.

"No offence, my good sir, no offence!  I only remember your mother--knew
her when she was a girl.  But it is your father that you feature,
sir.  I had the pleasure of seeing your father too.  Parents alive, Mr.
Ladislaw?"

"No!" thundered Will, in the same attitude as before.

"Should be glad to do you a service, Mr. Ladislaw--by Jove, I should!
Hope to meet again."

Hereupon Raffles, who had lifted his hat with the last words, turned
himself round with a swing of his leg and walked away.  Will looked
after him a moment, and could see that he did not re-enter the
auction-room, but appeared to be walking towards the road.  For an
instant he thought that he had been foolish not to let the man go on
talking;--but no! on the whole he preferred doing without knowledge
from that source.

Later in the evening, however, Raffles overtook him in the street, and
appearing either to have forgotten the roughness of his former
reception or to intend avenging it by a forgiving familiarity, greeted
him jovially and walked by his side, remarking at first on the
pleasantness of the town and neighborhood.  Will suspected that the man
had been drinking and was considering how to shake him off when Raffles
said--

"I've been abroad myself, Mr. Ladislaw--I've seen the world--used to
parley-vous a little.  It was at Boulogne I saw your father--a most
uncommon likeness you are of him, by Jove! mouth--nose--eyes--hair
turned off your brow just like his--a little in the foreign style.
John Bull doesn't do much of that.  But your father was very ill when I
saw him.  Lord, lord! hands you might see through.  You were a small
youngster then.  Did he get well?"

"No," said Will, curtly.

"Ah!  Well!  I've often wondered what became of your mother.  She ran
away from her friends when she was a young lass--a proud-spirited
lass, and pretty, by Jove!  I knew the reason why she ran away," said
Raffles, winking slowly as he looked sideways at Will.

"You know nothing dishonorable of her, sir," said Will, turning on him
rather savagely.  But Mr. Raffles just now was not sensitive to shades
of manner.

"Not a bit!" said he, tossing his head decisively "She was a little too
honorable to like her friends--that was it!"  Here Raffles again winked
slowly.  "Lord bless you, I knew all about 'em--a little in what you
may call the respectable thieving line--the high style of
receiving-house--none of your holes and corners--first-rate. Slap-up
shop, high profits and no mistake.  But Lord!  Sarah would have known
nothing about it--a dashing young lady she was--fine
boarding-school--fit for a lord's wife--only Archie Duncan threw it at
her out of spite, because she would have nothing to do with him.  And
so she ran away from the whole concern.  I travelled for 'em, sir, in a
gentlemanly way--at a high salary.  They didn't mind her running away
at first--godly folks, sir, very godly--and she was for the stage.  The
son was alive then, and the daughter was at a discount.  Hallo! here we
are at the Blue Bull.  What do you say, Mr. Ladislaw?--shall we turn in
and have a glass?"

"No, I must say good evening," said Will, dashing up a passage which
led into Lowick Gate, and almost running to get out of Raffles's reach.

He walked a long while on the Lowick road away from the town, glad of
the starlit darkness when it came.  He felt as if he had had dirt cast
on him amidst shouts of scorn.  There was this to confirm the fellow's
statement--that his mother never would tell him the reason why she had
run away from her family.

Well! what was he, Will Ladislaw, the worse, supposing the truth about
that family to be the ugliest?  His mother had braved hardship in order
to separate herself from it.  But if Dorothea's friends had known this
story--if the Chettams had known it--they would have had a fine color
to give their suspicions a welcome ground for thinking him unfit to
come near her.  However, let them suspect what they pleased, they would
find themselves in the wrong.  They would find out that the blood in
his veins was as free from the taint of meanness as theirs.



CHAPTER LXI.

    "Inconsistencies," answered Imlac, "cannot both be right,
    but imputed to man they may both be true."--Rasselas.


The same night, when Mr. Bulstrode returned from a journey to Brassing
on business, his good wife met him in the entrance-hall and drew him
into his private sitting-room.

"Nicholas," she said, fixing her honest eyes upon him anxiously, "there
has been such a disagreeable man here asking for you--it has made me
quite uncomfortable."

"What kind of man, my dear," said Mr. Bulstrode, dreadfully certain of
the answer.

"A red-faced man with large whiskers, and most impudent in his manner.
He declared he was an old friend of yours, and said you would be sorry
not to see him.  He wanted to wait for you here, but I told him he
could see you at the Bank to-morrow morning.  Most impudent he
was!--stared at me, and said his friend Nick had luck in wives.  I
don't believe he would have gone away, if Blucher had not happened to
break his chain and come running round on the gravel--for I was in the
garden; so I said, 'You'd better go away--the dog is very fierce, and I
can't hold him.'  Do you really know anything of such a man?"

"I believe I know who he is, my dear," said Mr. Bulstrode, in his usual
subdued voice, "an unfortunate dissolute wretch, whom I helped too much
in days gone by.  However, I presume you will not be troubled by him
again.  He will probably come to the Bank--to beg, doubtless."

No more was said on the subject until the next day, when Mr. Bulstrode
had returned from the town and was dressing for dinner.  His wife, not
sure that he was come home, looked into his dressing-room and saw him
with his coat and cravat off, leaning one arm on a chest of drawers and
staring absently at the ground.  He started nervously and looked up as
she entered.

"You look very ill, Nicholas.  Is there anything the matter?"

"I have a good deal of pain in my head," said Mr. Bulstrode, who was so
frequently ailing that his wife was always ready to believe in this
cause of depression.

"Sit down and let me sponge it with vinegar."

Physically Mr. Bulstrode did not want the vinegar, but morally the
affectionate attention soothed him.  Though always polite, it was his
habit to receive such services with marital coolness, as his wife's
duty.  But to-day, while she was bending over him, he said, "You are
very good, Harriet," in a tone which had something new in it to her
ear; she did not know exactly what the novelty was, but her woman's
solicitude shaped itself into a darting thought that he might be going
to have an illness.

"Has anything worried you?" she said.  "Did that man come to you at the
Bank?"

"Yes; it was as I had supposed.  He is a man who at one time might have
done better.  But he has sunk into a drunken debauched creature."

"Is he quite gone away?" said Mrs. Bulstrode, anxiously but for certain
reasons she refrained from adding, "It was very disagreeable to hear
him calling himself a friend of yours."  At that moment she would not
have liked to say anything which implied her habitual consciousness
that her husband's earlier connections were not quite on a level with
her own.  Not that she knew much about them.  That her husband had at
first been employed in a bank, that he had afterwards entered into what
he called city business and gained a fortune before he was
three-and-thirty, that he had married a widow who was much older than
himself--a Dissenter, and in other ways probably of that
disadvantageous quality usually perceptible in a first wife if inquired
into with the dispassionate judgment of a second--was almost as much as
she had cared to learn beyond the glimpses which Mr. Bulstrode's
narrative occasionally gave of his early bent towards religion, his
inclination to be a preacher, and his association with missionary and
philanthropic efforts.  She believed in him as an excellent man whose
piety carried a peculiar eminence in belonging to a layman, whose
influence had turned her own mind toward seriousness, and whose share
of perishable good had been the means of raising her own position.  But
she also liked to think that it was well in every sense for Mr.
Bulstrode to have won the hand of Harriet Vincy; whose family was
undeniable in a Middlemarch light--a better light surely than any
thrown in London thoroughfares or dissenting chapel-yards. The
unreformed provincial mind distrusted London; and while true religion
was everywhere saving, honest Mrs. Bulstrode was convinced that to be
saved in the Church was more respectable.  She so much wished to ignore
towards others that her husband had ever been a London Dissenter, that
she liked to keep it out of sight even in talking to him.  He was quite
aware of this; indeed in some respects he was rather afraid of this
ingenuous wife, whose imitative piety and native worldliness were
equally sincere, who had nothing to be ashamed of, and whom he had
married out of a thorough inclination still subsisting.  But his fears
were such as belong to a man who cares to maintain his recognized
supremacy: the loss of high consideration from his wife, as from every
one else who did not clearly hate him out of enmity to the truth, would
be as the beginning of death to him.  When she said--

"Is he quite gone away?"

"Oh, I trust so," he answered, with an effort to throw as much sober
unconcern into his tone as possible!

But in truth Mr. Bulstrode was very far from a state of quiet trust.
In the interview at the Bank, Raffles had made it evident that his
eagerness to torment was almost as strong in him as any other greed.
He had frankly said that he had turned out of the way to come to
Middlemarch, just to look about him and see whether the neighborhood
would suit him to live in.  He had certainly had a few debts to pay
more than he expected, but the two hundred pounds were not gone yet: a
cool five-and-twenty would suffice him to go away with for the present.
What he had wanted chiefly was to see his friend Nick and family, and
know all about the prosperity of a man to whom he was so much attached.
By-and-by he might come back for a longer stay.  This time Raffles
declined to be "seen off the premises," as he expressed it--declined to
quit Middlemarch under Bulstrode's eyes.  He meant to go by coach the
next day--if he chose.

Bulstrode felt himself helpless.  Neither threats nor coaxing could
avail: he could not count on any persistent fear nor on any promise.
On the contrary, he felt a cold certainty at his heart that
Raffles--unless providence sent death to hinder him--would come back
to Middlemarch before long.  And that certainty was a terror.

It was not that he was in danger of legal punishment or of beggary: he
was in danger only of seeing disclosed to the judgment of his neighbors
and the mournful perception of his wife certain facts of his past life
which would render him an object of scorn and an opprobrium of the
religion with which he had diligently associated himself.  The terror
of being judged sharpens the memory: it sends an inevitable glare over
that long-unvisited past which has been habitually recalled only in
general phrases.  Even without memory, the life is bound into one by a
zone of dependence in growth and decay; but intense memory forces a man
to own his blameworthy past.  With memory set smarting like a reopened
wound, a man's past is not simply a dead history, an outworn
preparation of the present: it is not a repented error shaken loose
from the life: it is a still quivering part of himself, bringing
shudders and bitter flavors and the tinglings of a merited shame.

Into this second life Bulstrode's past had now risen, only the
pleasures of it seeming to have lost their quality.  Night and day,
without interruption save of brief sleep which only wove retrospect and
fear into a fantastic present, he felt the scenes of his earlier life
coming between him and everything else, as obstinately as when we look
through the window from a lighted room, the objects we turn our backs
on are still before us, instead of the grass and the trees. The
successive events inward and outward were there in one view: though
each might be dwelt on in turn, the rest still kept their hold in the
consciousness.

Once more he saw himself the young banker's clerk, with an agreeable
person, as clever in figures as he was fluent in speech and fond of
theological definition: an eminent though young member of a Calvinistic
dissenting church at Highbury, having had striking experience in
conviction of sin and sense of pardon.  Again he heard himself called
for as Brother Bulstrode in prayer meetings, speaking on religious
platforms, preaching in private houses.  Again he felt himself thinking
of the ministry as possibly his vocation, and inclined towards
missionary labor.  That was the happiest time of his life: that was the
spot he would have chosen now to awake in and find the rest a dream.
The people among whom Brother Bulstrode was distinguished were very
few, but they were very near to him, and stirred his satisfaction the
more; his power stretched through a narrow space, but he felt its
effect the more intensely.  He believed without effort in the peculiar
work of grace within him, and in the signs that God intended him for
special instrumentality.

Then came the moment of transition; it was with the sense of promotion
he had when he, an orphan educated at a commercial charity-school, was
invited to a fine villa belonging to Mr. Dunkirk, the richest man in
the congregation.  Soon he became an intimate there, honored for his
piety by the wife, marked out for his ability by the husband, whose
wealth was due to a flourishing city and west-end trade.  That was the
setting-in of a new current for his ambition, directing his prospects
of "instrumentality" towards the uniting of distinguished religious
gifts with successful business.

By-and-by came a decided external leading: a confidential subordinate
partner died, and nobody seemed to the principal so well fitted to fill
the severely felt vacancy as his young friend Bulstrode, if he would
become confidential accountant.  The offer was accepted.  The business
was a pawnbroker's, of the most magnificent sort both in extent and
profits; and on a short acquaintance with it Bulstrode became aware
that one source of magnificent profit was the easy reception of any
goods offered, without strict inquiry as to where they came from.  But
there was a branch house at the west end, and no pettiness or dinginess
to give suggestions of shame.

He remembered his first moments of shrinking.  They were private, and
were filled with arguments; some of these taking the form of prayer.
The business was established and had old roots; is it not one thing to
set up a new gin-palace and another to accept an investment in an old
one?  The profits made out of lost souls--where can the line be drawn
at which they begin in human transactions?  Was it not even God's way
of saving His chosen?  "Thou knowest,"--the young Bulstrode had said
then, as the older Bulstrode was saying now--"Thou knowest how loose
my soul sits from these things--how I view them all as implements for
tilling Thy garden rescued here and there from the wilderness."

Metaphors and precedents were not wanting; peculiar spiritual
experiences were not wanting which at last made the retention of his
position seem a service demanded of him: the vista of a fortune had
already opened itself, and Bulstrode's shrinking remained private.  Mr.
Dunkirk had never expected that there would be any shrinking at all: he
had never conceived that trade had anything to do with the scheme of
salvation.  And it was true that Bulstrode found himself carrying on
two distinct lives; his religious activity could not be incompatible
with his business as soon as he had argued himself into not feeling it
incompatible.

Mentally surrounded with that past again, Bulstrode had the same
pleas--indeed, the years had been perpetually spinning them into
intricate thickness, like masses of spider-web, padding the moral
sensibility; nay, as age made egoism more eager but less enjoying, his
soul had become more saturated with the belief that he did everything
for God's sake, being indifferent to it for his own.  And yet--if he
could be back in that far-off spot with his youthful poverty--why, then
he would choose to be a missionary.

But the train of causes in which he had locked himself went on.  There
was trouble in the fine villa at Highbury.  Years before, the only
daughter had run away, defied her parents, and gone on the stage; and
now the only boy died, and after a short time Mr. Dunkirk died also.
The wife, a simple pious woman, left with all the wealth in and out of
the magnificent trade, of which she never knew the precise nature, had
come to believe in Bulstrode, and innocently adore him as women often
adore their priest or "man-made" minister.  It was natural that after a
time marriage should have been thought of between them.  But Mrs.
Dunkirk had qualms and yearnings about her daughter, who had long been
regarded as lost both to God and her parents.  It was known that the
daughter had married, but she was utterly gone out of sight.  The
mother, having lost her boy, imagined a grandson, and wished in a
double sense to reclaim her daughter.  If she were found, there would
be a channel for property--perhaps a wide one--in the provision for
several grandchildren.  Efforts to find her must be made before Mrs.
Dunkirk would marry again.  Bulstrode concurred; but after
advertisement as well as other modes of inquiry had been tried, the
mother believed that her daughter was not to be found, and consented to
marry without reservation of property.

The daughter had been found; but only one man besides Bulstrode knew
it, and he was paid for keeping silence and carrying himself away.

That was the bare fact which Bulstrode was now forced to see in the
rigid outline with which acts present themselves onlookers.  But for
himself at that distant time, and even now in burning memory, the fact
was broken into little sequences, each justified as it came by
reasonings which seemed to prove it righteous.  Bulstrode's course up
to that time had, he thought, been sanctioned by remarkable
providences, appearing to point the way for him to be the agent in
making the best use of a large property and withdrawing it from
perversion.  Death and other striking dispositions, such as feminine
trustfulness, had come; and Bulstrode would have adopted Cromwell's
words--"Do you call these bare events?  The Lord pity you!"  The
events were comparatively small, but the essential condition was
there--namely, that they were in favor of his own ends.  It was easy
for him to settle what was due from him to others by inquiring what
were God's intentions with regard to himself.  Could it be for God's
service that this fortune should in any considerable proportion go to a
young woman and her husband who were given up to the lightest pursuits,
and might scatter it abroad in triviality--people who seemed to lie
outside the path of remarkable providences?  Bulstrode had never said
to himself beforehand, "The daughter shall not be found"--nevertheless
when the moment came he kept her existence hidden; and when other
moments followed, he soothed the mother with consolation in the
probability that the unhappy young woman might be no more.

There were hours in which Bulstrode felt that his action was
unrighteous; but how could he go back?  He had mental exercises, called
himself nought, laid hold on redemption, and went on in his course of
instrumentality.  And after five years Death again came to widen his
path, by taking away his wife.  He did gradually withdraw his capital,
but he did not make the sacrifices requisite to put an end to the
business, which was carried on for thirteen years afterwards before it
finally collapsed.  Meanwhile Nicholas Bulstrode had used his hundred
thousand discreetly, and was become provincially, solidly important--a
banker, a Churchman, a public benefactor; also a sleeping partner in
trading concerns, in which his ability was directed to economy in the
raw material, as in the case of the dyes which rotted Mr. Vincy's silk.
And now, when this respectability had lasted undisturbed for nearly
thirty years--when all that preceded it had long lain benumbed in the
consciousness--that past had risen and immersed his thought as if with
the terrible irruption of a new sense overburthening the feeble being.

Meanwhile, in his conversation with Raffles, he had learned something
momentous, something which entered actively into the struggle of his
longings and terrors.  There, he thought, lay an opening towards
spiritual, perhaps towards material rescue.

The spiritual kind of rescue was a genuine need with him.  There may be
coarse hypocrites, who consciously affect beliefs and emotions for the
sake of gulling the world, but Bulstrode was not one of them.  He was
simply a man whose desires had been stronger than his theoretic
beliefs, and who had gradually explained the gratification of his
desires into satisfactory agreement with those beliefs.  If this be
hypocrisy, it is a process which shows itself occasionally in us all,
to whatever confession we belong, and whether we believe in the future
perfection of our race or in the nearest date fixed for the end of the
world; whether we regard the earth as a putrefying nidus for a saved
remnant, including ourselves, or have a passionate belief in the
solidarity of mankind.

The service he could do to the cause of religion had been through life
the ground he alleged to himself for his choice of action: it had been
the motive which he had poured out in his prayers.  Who would use money
and position better than he meant to use them?  Who could surpass him
in self-abhorrence and exaltation of God's cause?  And to Mr. Bulstrode
God's cause was something distinct from his own rectitude of conduct:
it enforced a discrimination of God's enemies, who were to be used
merely as instruments, and whom it would be as well if possible to keep
out of money and consequent influence.  Also, profitable investments in
trades where the power of the prince of this world showed its most
active devices, became sanctified by a right application of the profits
in the hands of God's servant.

This implicit reasoning is essentially no more peculiar to evangelical
belief than the use of wide phrases for narrow motives is peculiar to
Englishmen.  There is no general doctrine which is not capable of
eating out our morality if unchecked by the deep-seated habit of direct
fellow-feeling with individual fellow-men.

But a man who believes in something else than his own greed, has
necessarily a conscience or standard to which he more or less adapts
himself.  Bulstrode's standard had been his serviceableness to God's
cause: "I am sinful and nought--a vessel to be consecrated by use--but
use me!"--had been the mould into which he had constrained his immense
need of being something important and predominating.  And now had come
a moment in which that mould seemed in danger of being broken and
utterly cast away.

What if the acts he had reconciled himself to because they made him a
stronger instrument of the divine glory, were to become the pretext of
the scoffer, and a darkening of that glory?  If this were to be the
ruling of Providence, he was cast out from the temple as one who had
brought unclean offerings.

He had long poured out utterances of repentance.  But today a
repentance had come which was of a bitterer flavor, and a threatening
Providence urged him to a kind of propitiation which was not simply a
doctrinal transaction.  The divine tribunal had changed its aspect for
him; self-prostration was no longer enough, and he must bring
restitution in his hand.  It was really before his God that Bulstrode
was about to attempt such restitution as seemed possible: a great dread
had seized his susceptible frame, and the scorching approach of shame
wrought in him a new spiritual need.  Night and day, while the
resurgent threatening past was making a conscience within him, he was
thinking by what means he could recover peace and trust--by what
sacrifice he could stay the rod.  His belief in these moments of dread
was, that if he spontaneously did something right, God would save him
from the consequences of wrong-doing. For religion can only change when
the emotions which fill it are changed; and the religion of personal
fear remains nearly at the level of the savage.

He had seen Raffles actually going away on the Brassing coach, and this
was a temporary relief; it removed the pressure of an immediate dread,
but did not put an end to the spiritual conflict and the need to win
protection.  At last he came to a difficult resolve, and wrote a letter
to Will Ladislaw, begging him to be at the Shrubs that evening for a
private interview at nine o'clock. Will had felt no particular surprise
at the request, and connected it with some new notions about the
"Pioneer;" but when he was shown into Mr. Bulstrode's private room, he
was struck with the painfully worn look on the banker's face, and was
going to say, "Are you ill?" when, checking himself in that abruptness,
he only inquired after Mrs. Bulstrode, and her satisfaction with the
picture bought for her.

"Thank you, she is quite satisfied; she has gone out with her daughters
this evening.  I begged you to come, Mr. Ladislaw, because I have a
communication of a very private--indeed, I will say, of a sacredly
confidential nature, which I desire to make to you.  Nothing, I dare
say, has been farther from your thoughts than that there had been
important ties in the past which could connect your history with mine."

Will felt something like an electric shock.  He was already in a state
of keen sensitiveness and hardly allayed agitation on the subject of
ties in the past, and his presentiments were not agreeable.  It seemed
like the fluctuations of a dream--as if the action begun by that loud
bloated stranger were being carried on by this pale-eyed sickly looking
piece of respectability, whose subdued tone and glib formality of
speech were at this moment almost as repulsive to him as their
remembered contrast.  He answered, with a marked change of color--

"No, indeed, nothing."

"You see before you, Mr. Ladislaw, a man who is deeply stricken.  But
for the urgency of conscience and the knowledge that I am before the
bar of One who seeth not as man seeth, I should be under no compulsion
to make the disclosure which has been my object in asking you to come
here to-night. So far as human laws go, you have no claim on me
whatever."

Will was even more uncomfortable than wondering.  Mr. Bulstrode had
paused, leaning his head on his hand, and looking at the floor.  But he
now fixed his examining glance on Will and said--

"I am told that your mother's name was Sarah Dunkirk, and that she ran
away from her friends to go on the stage.  Also, that your father was
at one time much emaciated by illness.  May I ask if you can confirm
these statements?"

"Yes, they are all true," said Will, struck with the order in which an
inquiry had come, that might have been expected to be preliminary to
the banker's previous hints.  But Mr. Bulstrode had to-night followed
the order of his emotions; he entertained no doubt that the opportunity
for restitution had come, and he had an overpowering impulse towards
the penitential expression by which he was deprecating chastisement.

"Do you know any particulars of your mother's family?" he continued.

"No; she never liked to speak of them.  She was a very generous,
honorable woman," said Will, almost angrily.

"I do not wish to allege anything against her.  Did she never mention
her mother to you at all?"

"I have heard her say that she thought her mother did not know the
reason of her running away.  She said 'poor mother' in a pitying tone."

"That mother became my wife," said Bulstrode, and then paused a moment
before he added, "you have a claim on me, Mr. Ladislaw: as I said
before, not a legal claim, but one which my conscience recognizes.  I
was enriched by that marriage--a result which would probably not have
taken place--certainly not to the same extent--if your grandmother
could have discovered her daughter.  That daughter, I gather, is no
longer living!"

"No," said Will, feeling suspicion and repugnance rising so strongly
within him, that without quite knowing what he did, he took his hat
from the floor and stood up.  The impulse within him was to reject the
disclosed connection.

"Pray be seated, Mr. Ladislaw," said Bulstrode, anxiously.  "Doubtless
you are startled by the suddenness of this discovery.  But I entreat
your patience with one who is already bowed down by inward trial."

Will reseated himself, feeling some pity which was half contempt for
this voluntary self-abasement of an elderly man.

"It is my wish, Mr. Ladislaw, to make amends for the deprivation which
befell your mother.  I know that you are without fortune, and I wish to
supply you adequately from a store which would have probably already
been yours had your grandmother been certain of your mother's existence
and been able to find her."

Mr. Bulstrode paused.  He felt that he was performing a striking piece
of scrupulosity in the judgment of his auditor, and a penitential act
in the eyes of God.  He had no clew to the state of Will Ladislaw's
mind, smarting as it was from the clear hints of Raffles, and with its
natural quickness in construction stimulated by the expectation of
discoveries which he would have been glad to conjure back into
darkness.  Will made no answer for several moments, till Mr. Bulstrode,
who at the end of his speech had cast his eyes on the floor, now raised
them with an examining glance, which Will met fully, saying--

"I suppose you did know of my mother's existence, and knew where she
might have been found."

Bulstrode shrank--there was a visible quivering in his face and hands.
He was totally unprepared to have his advances met in this way, or to
find himself urged into more revelation than he had beforehand set down
as needful.  But at that moment he dared not tell a lie, and he felt
suddenly uncertain of his ground which he had trodden with some
confidence before.

"I will not deny that you conjecture rightly," he answered, with a
faltering in his tone.  "And I wish to make atonement to you as the one
still remaining who has suffered a loss through me.  You enter, I
trust, into my purpose, Mr. Ladislaw, which has a reference to higher
than merely human claims, and as I have already said, is entirely
independent of any legal compulsion.  I am ready to narrow my own
resources and the prospects of my family by binding myself to allow you
five hundred pounds yearly during my life, and to leave you a
proportional capital at my death--nay, to do still more, if more should
be definitely necessary to any laudable project on your part."  Mr.
Bulstrode had gone on to particulars in the expectation that these
would work strongly on Ladislaw, and merge other feelings in grateful
acceptance.

But Will was looking as stubborn as possible, with his lip pouting and
his fingers in his side-pockets. He was not in the least touched, and
said firmly,--

"Before I make any reply to your proposition, Mr. Bulstrode, I must beg
you to answer a question or two.  Were you connected with the business
by which that fortune you speak of was originally made?"

Mr. Bulstrode's thought was, "Raffles has told him."  How could he
refuse to answer when he had volunteered what drew forth the question?
He answered, "Yes."

"And was that business--or was it not--a thoroughly dishonorable
one--nay, one that, if its nature had been made public, might have
ranked those concerned in it with thieves and convicts?"

Will's tone had a cutting bitterness: he was moved to put his question
as nakedly as he could.

Bulstrode reddened with irrepressible anger.  He had been prepared for
a scene of self-abasement, but his intense pride and his habit of
supremacy overpowered penitence, and even dread, when this young man,
whom he had meant to benefit, turned on him with the air of a judge.

"The business was established before I became connected with it, sir;
nor is it for you to institute an inquiry of that kind," he answered,
not raising his voice, but speaking with quick defiantness.

"Yes, it is," said Will, starting up again with his hat in his hand.
"It is eminently mine to ask such questions, when I have to decide
whether I will have transactions with you and accept your money.  My
unblemished honor is important to me.  It is important to me to have no
stain on my birth and connections.  And now I find there is a stain
which I can't help.  My mother felt it, and tried to keep as clear of
it as she could, and so will I.  You shall keep your ill-gotten money.
If I had any fortune of my own, I would willingly pay it to any one who
could disprove what you have told me.  What I have to thank you for is
that you kept the money till now, when I can refuse it.  It ought to
lie with a man's self that he is a gentleman.  Good-night, sir."

Bulstrode was going to speak, but Will, with determined quickness, was
out of the room in an instant, and in another the hall-door had closed
behind him.  He was too strongly possessed with passionate rebellion
against this inherited blot which had been thrust on his knowledge to
reflect at present whether he had not been too hard on Bulstrode--too
arrogantly merciless towards a man of sixty, who was making efforts at
retrieval when time had rendered them vain.

No third person listening could have thoroughly understood the
impetuosity of Will's repulse or the bitterness of his words.  No one
but himself then knew how everything connected with the sentiment of
his own dignity had an immediate bearing for him on his relation to
Dorothea and to Mr. Casaubon's treatment of him.  And in the rush of
impulses by which he flung back that offer of Bulstrode's there was
mingled the sense that it would have been impossible for him ever to
tell Dorothea that he had accepted it.

As for Bulstrode--when Will was gone he suffered a violent reaction,
and wept like a woman.  It was the first time he had encountered an
open expression of scorn from any man higher than Raffles; and with
that scorn hurrying like venom through his system, there was no
sensibility left to consolations.  But the relief of weeping had to be
checked.  His wife and daughters soon came home from hearing the
address of an Oriental missionary, and were full of regret that papa
had not heard, in the first instance, the interesting things which they
tried to repeat to him.

Perhaps, through all other hidden thoughts, the one that breathed most
comfort was, that Will Ladislaw at least was not likely to publish what
had taken place that evening.



CHAPTER LXII.

    "He was a squyer of lowe degre,
     That loved the king's daughter of Hungrie.
                                    --Old Romance.


Will Ladislaw's mind was now wholly bent on seeing Dorothea again, and
forthwith quitting Middlemarch.  The morning after his agitating scene
with Bulstrode he wrote a brief letter to her, saying that various
causes had detained him in the neighborhood longer than he had
expected, and asking her permission to call again at Lowick at some
hour which she would mention on the earliest possible day, he being
anxious to depart, but unwilling to do so until she had granted him an
interview.  He left the letter at the office, ordering the messenger to
carry it to Lowick Manor, and wait for an answer.

Ladislaw felt the awkwardness of asking for more last words.  His
former farewell had been made in the hearing of Sir James Chettam, and
had been announced as final even to the butler.  It is certainly trying
to a man's dignity to reappear when he is not expected to do so: a
first farewell has pathos in it, but to come back for a second lends an
opening to comedy, and it was possible even that there might be bitter
sneers afloat about Will's motives for lingering.  Still it was on the
whole more satisfactory to his feeling to take the directest means of
seeing Dorothea, than to use any device which might give an air of
chance to a meeting of which he wished her to understand that it was
what he earnestly sought.  When he had parted from her before, he had
been in ignorance of facts which gave a new aspect to the relation
between them, and made a more absolute severance than he had then
believed in.  He knew nothing of Dorothea's private fortune, and being
little used to reflect on such matters, took it for granted that
according to Mr. Casaubon's arrangement marriage to him, Will Ladislaw,
would mean that she consented to be penniless.  That was not what he
could wish for even in his secret heart, or even if she had been ready
to meet such hard contrast for his sake.  And then, too, there was the
fresh smart of that disclosure about his mother's family, which if
known would be an added reason why Dorothea's friends should look down
upon him as utterly below her.  The secret hope that after some years
he might come back with the sense that he had at least a personal value
equal to her wealth, seemed now the dreamy continuation of a dream.
This change would surely justify him in asking Dorothea to receive him
once more.

But Dorothea on that morning was not at home to receive Will's note.
In consequence of a letter from her uncle announcing his intention to
be at home in a week, she had driven first to Freshitt to carry the
news, meaning to go on to the Grange to deliver some orders with which
her uncle had intrusted her--thinking, as he said, "a little mental
occupation of this sort good for a widow."

If Will Ladislaw could have overheard some of the talk at Freshitt that
morning, he would have felt all his suppositions confirmed as to the
readiness of certain people to sneer at his lingering in the
neighborhood.  Sir James, indeed, though much relieved concerning
Dorothea, had been on the watch to learn Ladislaw's movements, and had
an instructed informant in Mr. Standish, who was necessarily in his
confidence on this matter.  That Ladislaw had stayed in Middlemarch
nearly two months after he had declared that he was going immediately,
was a fact to embitter Sir James's suspicions, or at least to justify
his aversion to a "young fellow" whom he represented to himself as
slight, volatile, and likely enough to show such recklessness as
naturally went along with a position unriveted by family ties or a
strict profession.  But he had just heard something from Standish
which, while it justified these surmises about Will, offered a means of
nullifying all danger with regard to Dorothea.

Unwonted circumstances may make us all rather unlike ourselves: there
are conditions under which the most majestic person is obliged to
sneeze, and our emotions are liable to be acted on in the same
incongruous manner.  Good Sir James was this morning so far unlike
himself that he was irritably anxious to say something to Dorothea on a
subject which he usually avoided as if it had been a matter of shame to
them both.  He could not use Celia as a medium, because he did not
choose that she should know the kind of gossip he had in his mind; and
before Dorothea happened to arrive he had been trying to imagine how,
with his shyness and unready tongue, he could ever manage to introduce
his communication.  Her unexpected presence brought him to utter
hopelessness in his own power of saying anything unpleasant; but
desperation suggested a resource; he sent the groom on an unsaddled
horse across the park with a pencilled note to Mrs. Cadwallader, who
already knew the gossip, and would think it no compromise of herself to
repeat it as often as required.

Dorothea was detained on the good pretext that Mr. Garth, whom she
wanted to see, was expected at the hall within the hour, and she was
still talking to Caleb on the gravel when Sir James, on the watch for
the rector's wife, saw her coming and met her with the needful hints.

"Enough!  I understand,"--said Mrs. Cadwallader.  "You shall be
innocent.  I am such a blackamoor that I cannot smirch myself."

"I don't mean that it's of any consequence," said Sir James, disliking
that Mrs. Cadwallader should understand too much.  "Only it is
desirable that Dorothea should know there are reasons why she should
not receive him again; and I really can't say so to her.  It will come
lightly from you."

It came very lightly indeed.  When Dorothea quitted Caleb and turned to
meet them, it appeared that Mrs. Cadwallader had stepped across the
park by the merest chance in the world, just to chat with Celia in a
matronly way about the baby.  And so Mr. Brooke was coming back?
Delightful!--coming back, it was to be hoped, quite cured of
Parliamentary fever and pioneering.  Apropos of the "Pioneer"--somebody
had prophesied that it would soon be like a dying dolphin, and turn all
colors for want of knowing how to help itself, because Mr. Brooke's
protege, the brilliant young Ladislaw, was gone or going.  Had Sir
James heard that?

The three were walking along the gravel slowly, and Sir James, turning
aside to whip a shrub, said he had heard something of that sort.

"All false!" said Mrs. Cadwallader.  "He is not gone, or going,
apparently; the 'Pioneer' keeps its color, and Mr. Orlando Ladislaw is
making a sad dark-blue scandal by warbling continually with your Mr.
Lydgate's wife, who they tell me is as pretty as pretty can be.  It
seems nobody ever goes into the house without finding this young
gentleman lying on the rug or warbling at the piano.  But the people in
manufacturing towns are always disreputable."

"You began by saying that one report was false, Mrs. Cadwallader, and I
believe this is false too," said Dorothea, with indignant energy; "at
least, I feel sure it is a misrepresentation.  I will not hear any evil
spoken of Mr. Ladislaw; he has already suffered too much injustice."

Dorothea when thoroughly moved cared little what any one thought of her
feelings; and even if she had been able to reflect, she would have held
it petty to keep silence at injurious words about Will from fear of
being herself misunderstood.  Her face was flushed and her lip trembled.

Sir James, glancing at her, repented of his stratagem; but Mrs.
Cadwallader, equal to all occasions, spread the palms of her hands
outward and said--"Heaven grant it, my dear!--I mean that all bad tales
about anybody may be false.  But it is a pity that young Lydgate should
have married one of these Middlemarch girls.  Considering he's a son of
somebody, he might have got a woman with good blood in her veins, and
not too young, who would have put up with his profession.  There's
Clara Harfager, for instance, whose friends don't know what to do with
her; and she has a portion.  Then we might have had her among us.
However!--it's no use being wise for other people.  Where is Celia?
Pray let us go in."

"I am going on immediately to Tipton," said Dorothea, rather haughtily.
"Good-by."

Sir James could say nothing as he accompanied her to the carriage.  He
was altogether discontented with the result of a contrivance which had
cost him some secret humiliation beforehand.

Dorothea drove along between the berried hedgerows and the shorn
corn-fields, not seeing or hearing anything around.  The tears came and
rolled down her cheeks, but she did not know it.  The world, it seemed,
was turning ugly and hateful, and there was no place for her
trustfulness.  "It is not true--it is not true!" was the voice within
her that she listened to; but all the while a remembrance to which
there had always clung a vague uneasiness would thrust itself on her
attention--the remembrance of that day when she had found Will Ladislaw
with Mrs. Lydgate, and had heard his voice accompanied by the piano.

"He said he would never do anything that I disapproved--I wish I could
have told him that I disapproved of that," said poor Dorothea,
inwardly, feeling a strange alternation between anger with Will and the
passionate defence of him.  "They all try to blacken him before me; but
I will care for no pain, if he is not to blame.  I always believed he
was good."--These were her last thoughts before she felt that the
carriage was passing under the archway of the lodge-gate at the Grange,
when she hurriedly pressed her handkerchief to her face and began to
think of her errands.  The coachman begged leave to take out the horses
for half an hour as there was something wrong with a shoe; and
Dorothea, having the sense that she was going to rest, took off her
gloves and bonnet, while she was leaning against a statue in the
entrance-hall, and talking to the housekeeper.  At last she said--

"I must stay here a little, Mrs. Kell.  I will go into the library and
write you some memoranda from my uncle's letter, if you will open the
shutters for me."

"The shutters are open, madam," said Mrs. Kell, following Dorothea, who
had walked along as she spoke.  "Mr. Ladislaw is there, looking for
something."

(Will had come to fetch a portfolio of his own sketches which he had
missed in the act of packing his movables, and did not choose to leave
behind.)

Dorothea's heart seemed to turn over as if it had had a blow, but she
was not perceptibly checked: in truth, the sense that Will was there
was for the moment all-satisfying to her, like the sight of something
precious that one has lost.  When she reached the door she said to Mrs.
Kell--

"Go in first, and tell him that I am here."

Will had found his portfolio, and had laid it on the table at the far
end of the room, to turn over the sketches and please himself by
looking at the memorable piece of art which had a relation to nature
too mysterious for Dorothea.  He was smiling at it still, and shaking
the sketches into order with the thought that he might find a letter
from her awaiting him at Middlemarch, when Mrs. Kell close to his elbow
said--

"Mrs. Casaubon is coming in, sir."

Will turned round quickly, and the next moment Dorothea was entering.
As Mrs. Kell closed the door behind her they met: each was looking at
the other, and consciousness was overflowed by something that
suppressed utterance.  It was not confusion that kept them silent, for
they both felt that parting was near, and there is no shamefacedness in
a sad parting.

She moved automatically towards her uncle's chair against the
writing-table, and Will, after drawing it out a little for her, went a
few paces off and stood opposite to her.

"Pray sit down," said Dorothea, crossing her hands on her lap; "I am
very glad you were here."  Will thought that her face looked just as it
did when she first shook hands with him in Rome; for her widow's cap,
fixed in her bonnet, had gone off with it, and he could see that she
had lately been shedding tears.  But the mixture of anger in her
agitation had vanished at the sight of him; she had been used, when
they were face to face, always to feel confidence and the happy freedom
which comes with mutual understanding, and how could other people's
words hinder that effect on a sudden?  Let the music which can take
possession of our frame and fill the air with joy for us, sound once
more--what does it signify that we heard it found fault with in its
absence?

"I have sent a letter to Lowick Manor to-day, asking leave to see you,"
said Will, seating himself opposite to her.  "I am going away
immediately, and I could not go without speaking to you again."

"I thought we had parted when you came to Lowick many weeks ago--you
thought you were going then," said Dorothea, her voice trembling a
little.

"Yes; but I was in ignorance then of things which I know now--things
which have altered my feelings about the future.  When I saw you
before, I was dreaming that I might come back some day.  I don't think
I ever shall--now."  Will paused here.

"You wished me to know the reasons?" said Dorothea, timidly.

"Yes," said Will, impetuously, shaking his head backward, and looking
away from her with irritation in his face.  "Of course I must wish it.
I have been grossly insulted in your eyes and in the eyes of others.
There has been a mean implication against my character.  I wish you to
know that under no circumstances would I have lowered myself by--under
no circumstances would I have given men the chance of saying that I
sought money under the pretext of seeking--something else.  There was
no need of other safeguard against me--the safeguard of wealth was
enough."

Will rose from his chair with the last word and went--he hardly knew
where; but it was to the projecting window nearest him, which had been
open as now about the same season a year ago, when he and Dorothea had
stood within it and talked together.  Her whole heart was going out at
this moment in sympathy with Will's indignation: she only wanted to
convince him that she had never done him injustice, and he seemed to
have turned away from her as if she too had been part of the unfriendly
world.

"It would be very unkind of you to suppose that I ever attributed any
meanness to you," she began.  Then in her ardent way, wanting to plead
with him, she moved from her chair and went in front of him to her old
place in the window, saying, "Do you suppose that I ever disbelieved in
you?"

When Will saw her there, he gave a start and moved backward out of the
window, without meeting her glance.  Dorothea was hurt by this movement
following up the previous anger of his tone.  She was ready to say that
it was as hard on her as on him, and that she was helpless; but those
strange particulars of their relation which neither of them could
explicitly mention kept her always in dread of saying too much.  At
this moment she had no belief that Will would in any case have wanted
to marry her, and she feared using words which might imply such a
belief.  She only said earnestly, recurring to his last word--

"I am sure no safeguard was ever needed against you."

Will did not answer.  In the stormy fluctuation of his feelings these
words of hers seemed to him cruelly neutral, and he looked pale and
miserable after his angry outburst.  He went to the table and fastened
up his portfolio, while Dorothea looked at him from the distance.  They
were wasting these last moments together in wretched silence.  What
could he say, since what had got obstinately uppermost in his mind was
the passionate love for her which he forbade himself to utter?  What
could she say, since she might offer him no help--since she was forced
to keep the money that ought to have been his?--since to-day he seemed
not to respond as he used to do to her thorough trust and liking?

But Will at last turned away from his portfolio and approached the
window again.

"I must go," he said, with that peculiar look of the eyes which
sometimes accompanies bitter feeling, as if they had been tired and
burned with gazing too close at a light.

"What shall you do in life?" said Dorothea, timidly.  "Have your
intentions remained just the same as when we said good-by before?"

"Yes," said Will, in a tone that seemed to waive the subject as
uninteresting.  "I shall work away at the first thing that offers.  I
suppose one gets a habit of doing without happiness or hope."

"Oh, what sad words!" said Dorothea, with a dangerous tendency to sob.
Then trying to smile, she added, "We used to agree that we were alike
in speaking too strongly."

"I have not spoken too strongly now," said Will, leaning back against
the angle of the wall.  "There are certain things which a man can only
go through once in his life; and he must know some time or other that
the best is over with him.  This experience has happened to me while I
am very young--that is all.  What I care more for than I can ever care
for anything else is absolutely forbidden to me--I don't mean merely
by being out of my reach, but forbidden me, even if it were within my
reach, by my own pride and honor--by everything I respect myself for.
Of course I shall go on living as a man might do who had seen heaven in
a trance."

Will paused, imagining that it would be impossible for Dorothea to
misunderstand this; indeed he felt that he was contradicting himself
and offending against his self-approval in speaking to her so plainly;
but still--it could not be fairly called wooing a woman to tell her
that he would never woo her.  It must be admitted to be a ghostly kind
of wooing.

But Dorothea's mind was rapidly going over the past with quite another
vision than his.  The thought that she herself might be what Will most
cared for did throb through her an instant, but then came doubt: the
memory of the little they had lived through together turned pale and
shrank before the memory which suggested how much fuller might have
been the intercourse between Will and some one else with whom he had
had constant companionship.  Everything he had said might refer to that
other relation, and whatever had passed between him and herself was
thoroughly explained by what she had always regarded as their simple
friendship and the cruel obstruction thrust upon it by her husband's
injurious act.  Dorothea stood silent, with her eyes cast down
dreamily, while images crowded upon her which left the sickening
certainty that Will was referring to Mrs. Lydgate.  But why sickening?
He wanted her to know that here too his conduct should be above
suspicion.

Will was not surprised at her silence.  His mind also was tumultuously
busy while he watched her, and he was feeling rather wildly that
something must happen to hinder their parting--some miracle, clearly
nothing in their own deliberate speech.  Yet, after all, had she any
love for him?--he could not pretend to himself that he would rather
believe her to be without that pain.  He could not deny that a secret
longing for the assurance that she loved him was at the root of all his
words.

Neither of them knew how long they stood in that way.  Dorothea was
raising her eyes, and was about to speak, when the door opened and her
footman came to say--

"The horses are ready, madam, whenever you like to start."

"Presently," said Dorothea.  Then turning to Will, she said, "I have
some memoranda to write for the housekeeper."

"I must go," said Will, when the door had closed again--advancing
towards her.  "The day after to-morrow I shall leave Middlemarch."

"You have acted in every way rightly," said Dorothea, in a low tone,
feeling a pressure at her heart which made it difficult to speak.

She put out her hand, and Will took it for an instant without speaking,
for her words had seemed to him cruelly cold and unlike herself.  Their
eyes met, but there was discontent in his, and in hers there was only
sadness.  He turned away and took his portfolio under his arm.

"I have never done you injustice.  Please remember me," said Dorothea,
repressing a rising sob.

"Why should you say that?" said Will, with irritation.  "As if I were
not in danger of forgetting everything else."

He had really a movement of anger against her at that moment, and it
impelled him to go away without pause.  It was all one flash to
Dorothea--his last words--his distant bow to her as he reached the
door--the sense that he was no longer there.  She sank into the chair,
and for a few moments sat like a statue, while images and emotions were
hurrying upon her.  Joy came first, in spite of the threatening train
behind it--joy in the impression that it was really herself whom Will
loved and was renouncing, that there was really no other love less
permissible, more blameworthy, which honor was hurrying him away from.
They were parted all the same, but--Dorothea drew a deep breath and
felt her strength return--she could think of him unrestrainedly.  At
that moment the parting was easy to bear: the first sense of loving and
being loved excluded sorrow.  It was as if some hard icy pressure had
melted, and her consciousness had room to expand: her past was come
back to her with larger interpretation.  The joy was not the
less--perhaps it was the more complete just then--because of the
irrevocable parting; for there was no reproach, no contemptuous wonder
to imagine in any eye or from any lips.  He had acted so as to defy
reproach, and make wonder respectful.

Any one watching her might have seen that there was a fortifying
thought within her.  Just as when inventive power is working with glad
ease some small claim on the attention is fully met as if it were only
a cranny opened to the sunlight, it was easy now for Dorothea to write
her memoranda.  She spoke her last words to the housekeeper in cheerful
tones, and when she seated herself in the carriage her eyes were bright
and her cheeks blooming under the dismal bonnet.  She threw back the
heavy "weepers," and looked before her, wondering which road Will had
taken.  It was in her nature to be proud that he was blameless, and
through all her feelings there ran this vein--"I was right to defend
him."

The coachman was used to drive his grays at a good pace, Mr. Casaubon
being unenjoying and impatient in everything away from his desk, and
wanting to get to the end of all journeys; and Dorothea was now bowled
along quickly.  Driving was pleasant, for rain in the night had laid
the dust, and the blue sky looked far off, away from the region of the
great clouds that sailed in masses.  The earth looked like a happy
place under the vast heavens, and Dorothea was wishing that she might
overtake Will and see him once more.

After a turn of the road, there he was with the portfolio under his
arm; but the next moment she was passing him while he raised his hat,
and she felt a pang at being seated there in a sort of exaltation,
leaving him behind.  She could not look back at him.  It was as if a
crowd of indifferent objects had thrust them asunder, and forced them
along different paths, taking them farther and farther away from each
other, and making it useless to look back.  She could no more make any
sign that would seem to say, "Need we part?" than she could stop the
carriage to wait for him.  Nay, what a world of reasons crowded upon
her against any movement of her thought towards a future that might
reverse the decision of this day!

"I only wish I had known before--I wish he knew--then we could be quite
happy in thinking of each other, though we are forever parted.  And if
I could but have given him the money, and made things easier for
him!"--were the longings that came back the most persistently.  And
yet, so heavily did the world weigh on her in spite of her independent
energy, that with this idea of Will as in need of such help and at a
disadvantage with the world, there came always the vision of that
unfittingness of any closer relation between them which lay in the
opinion of every one connected with her.  She felt to the full all the
imperativeness of the motives which urged Will's conduct.  How could he
dream of her defying the barrier that her husband had placed between
them?--how could she ever say to herself that she would defy it?

Will's certainty as the carriage grew smaller in the distance, had much
more bitterness in it.  Very slight matters were enough to gall him in
his sensitive mood, and the sight of Dorothea driving past him while he
felt himself plodding along as a poor devil seeking a position in a
world which in his present temper offered him little that he coveted,
made his conduct seem a mere matter of necessity, and took away the
sustainment of resolve.  After all, he had no assurance that she loved
him: could any man pretend that he was simply glad in such a case to
have the suffering all on his own side?

That evening Will spent with the Lydgates; the next evening he was gone.





BOOK VII.





TWO TEMPTATIONS.



CHAPTER LXIII.

    These little things are great to little man.--GOLDSMITH.


"Have you seen much of your scientific phoenix, Lydgate, lately?" said
Mr. Toller at one of his Christmas dinner-parties, speaking to Mr.
Farebrother on his right hand.

"Not much, I am sorry to say," answered the Vicar, accustomed to parry
Mr. Toller's banter about his belief in the new medical light.  "I am
out of the way and he is too busy."

"Is he?  I am glad to hear it," said Dr. Minchin, with mingled suavity
and surprise.

"He gives a great deal of time to the New Hospital," said Mr.
Farebrother, who had his reasons for continuing the subject: "I hear of
that from my neighbor, Mrs. Casaubon, who goes there often.  She says
Lydgate is indefatigable, and is making a fine thing of Bulstrode's
institution.  He is preparing a new ward in case of the cholera coming
to us."

"And preparing theories of treatment to try on the patients, I
suppose," said Mr. Toller.

"Come, Toller, be candid," said Mr. Farebrother.  "You are too clever
not to see the good of a bold fresh mind in medicine, as well as in
everything else; and as to cholera, I fancy, none of you are very sure
what you ought to do.  If a man goes a little too far along a new road,
it is usually himself that he harms more than any one else."

"I am sure you and Wrench ought to be obliged to him," said Dr.
Minchin, looking towards Toller, "for he has sent you the cream of
Peacock's patients."

"Lydgate has been living at a great rate for a young beginner," said
Mr. Harry Toller, the brewer.  "I suppose his relations in the North
back him up."

"I hope so," said Mr. Chichely, "else he ought not to have married that
nice girl we were all so fond of.  Hang it, one has a grudge against a
man who carries off the prettiest girl in the town."

"Ay, by God! and the best too," said Mr. Standish.

"My friend Vincy didn't half like the marriage, I know that," said Mr.
Chichely.  "_He_ wouldn't do much.  How the relations on the other side
may have come down I can't say."  There was an emphatic kind of
reticence in Mr. Chichely's manner of speaking.

"Oh, I shouldn't think Lydgate ever looked to practice for a living,"
said Mr. Toller, with a slight touch of sarcasm, and there the subject
was dropped.

This was not the first time that Mr. Farebrother had heard hints of
Lydgate's expenses being obviously too great to be met by his practice,
but he thought it not unlikely that there were resources or
expectations which excused the large outlay at the time of Lydgate's
marriage, and which might hinder any bad consequences from the
disappointment in his practice.  One evening, when he took the pains to
go to Middlemarch on purpose to have a chat with Lydgate as of old, he
noticed in him an air of excited effort quite unlike his usual easy way
of keeping silence or breaking it with abrupt energy whenever he had
anything to say.  Lydgate talked persistently when they were in his
work-room, putting arguments for and against the probability of certain
biological views; but he had none of those definite things to say or to
show which give the waymarks of a patient uninterrupted pursuit, such
as he used himself to insist on, saying that "there must be a systole
and diastole in all inquiry," and that "a man's mind must be
continually expanding and shrinking between the whole human horizon and
the horizon of an object-glass." That evening he seemed to be talking
widely for the sake of resisting any personal bearing; and before long
they went into the drawing room, where Lydgate, having asked Rosamond
to give them music, sank back in his chair in silence, but with a
strange light in his eyes.  "He may have been taking an opiate," was a
thought that crossed Mr. Farebrother's mind--"tic-douloureux
perhaps--or medical worries."

It did not occur to him that Lydgate's marriage was not delightful: he
believed, as the rest did, that Rosamond was an amiable, docile
creature, though he had always thought her rather uninteresting--a
little too much the pattern-card of the finishing-school; and his
mother could not forgive Rosamond because she never seemed to see that
Henrietta Noble was in the room.  "However, Lydgate fell in love with
her," said the Vicar to himself, "and she must be to his taste."

Mr. Farebrother was aware that Lydgate was a proud man, but having very
little corresponding fibre in himself, and perhaps too little care
about personal dignity, except the dignity of not being mean or
foolish, he could hardly allow enough for the way in which Lydgate
shrank, as from a burn, from the utterance of any word about his
private affairs.  And soon after that conversation at Mr. Toller's, the
Vicar learned something which made him watch the more eagerly for an
opportunity of indirectly letting Lydgate know that if he wanted to
open himself about any difficulty there was a friendly ear ready.

The opportunity came at Mr. Vincy's, where, on New Year's Day, there
was a party, to which Mr. Farebrother was irresistibly invited, on the
plea that he must not forsake his old friends on the first new year of
his being a greater man, and Rector as well as Vicar.  And this party
was thoroughly friendly: all the ladies of the Farebrother family were
present; the Vincy children all dined at the table, and Fred had
persuaded his mother that if she did not invite Mary Garth, the
Farebrothers would regard it as a slight to themselves, Mary being
their particular friend.  Mary came, and Fred was in high spirits,
though his enjoyment was of a checkered kind--triumph that his mother
should see Mary's importance with the chief personages in the party
being much streaked with jealousy when Mr. Farebrother sat down by her.
Fred used to be much more easy about his own accomplishments in the
days when he had not begun to dread being "bowled out by Farebrother,"
and this terror was still before him.  Mrs. Vincy, in her fullest
matronly bloom, looked at Mary's little figure, rough wavy hair, and
visage quite without lilies and roses, and wondered; trying
unsuccessfully to fancy herself caring about Mary's appearance in
wedding clothes, or feeling complacency in grandchildren who would
"feature" the Garths.  However, the party was a merry one, and Mary was
particularly bright; being glad, for Fred's sake, that his friends were
getting kinder to her, and being also quite willing that they should
see how much she was valued by others whom they must admit to be judges.

Mr. Farebrother noticed that Lydgate seemed bored, and that Mr. Vincy
spoke as little as possible to his son-in-law. Rosamond was perfectly
graceful and calm, and only a subtle observation such as the Vicar had
not been roused to bestow on her would have perceived the total absence
of that interest in her husband's presence which a loving wife is sure
to betray, even if etiquette keeps her aloof from him.  When Lydgate
was taking part in the conversation, she never looked towards him any
more than if she had been a sculptured Psyche modelled to look another
way: and when, after being called out for an hour or two, he re-entered
the room, she seemed unconscious of the fact, which eighteen months
before would have had the effect of a numeral before ciphers.  In
reality, however, she was intensely aware of Lydgate's voice and
movements; and her pretty good-tempered air of unconsciousness was a
studied negation by which she satisfied her inward opposition to him
without compromise of propriety.  When the ladies were in the
drawing-room after Lydgate had been called away from the dessert, Mrs.
Farebrother, when Rosamond happened to be near her, said--"You have to
give up a great deal of your husband's society, Mrs. Lydgate."

"Yes, the life of a medical man is very arduous: especially when he is
so devoted to his profession as Mr. Lydgate is," said Rosamond, who was
standing, and moved easily away at the end of this correct little
speech.

"It is dreadfully dull for her when there is no company," said Mrs.
Vincy, who was seated at the old lady's side.  "I am sure I thought so
when Rosamond was ill, and I was staying with her.  You know, Mrs.
Farebrother, ours is a cheerful house.  I am of a cheerful disposition
myself, and Mr. Vincy always likes something to be going on.  That is
what Rosamond has been used to.  Very different from a husband out at
odd hours, and never knowing when he will come home, and of a close,
proud disposition, _I_ think"--indiscreet Mrs. Vincy did lower her tone
slightly with this parenthesis.  "But Rosamond always had an angel of a
temper; her brothers used very often not to please her, but she was
never the girl to show temper; from a baby she was always as good as
good, and with a complexion beyond anything.  But my children are all
good-tempered, thank God."

This was easily credible to any one looking at Mrs. Vincy as she threw
back her broad cap-strings, and smiled towards her three little girls,
aged from seven to eleven.  But in that smiling glance she was obliged
to include Mary Garth, whom the three girls had got into a corner to
make her tell them stories.  Mary was just finishing the delicious tale
of Rumpelstiltskin, which she had well by heart, because Letty was
never tired of communicating it to her ignorant elders from a favorite
red volume.  Louisa, Mrs. Vincy's darling, now ran to her with
wide-eyed serious excitement, crying, "Oh mamma, mamma, the little man
stamped so hard on the floor he couldn't get his leg out again!"

"Bless you, my cherub!" said mamma; "you shall tell me all about it
to-morrow. Go and listen!" and then, as her eyes followed Louisa back
towards the attractive corner, she thought that if Fred wished her to
invite Mary again she would make no objection, the children being so
pleased with her.

But presently the corner became still more animated, for Mr.
Farebrother came in, and seating himself behind Louisa, took her on his
lap; whereupon the girls all insisted that he must hear
Rumpelstiltskin, and Mary must tell it over again.  He insisted too,
and Mary, without fuss, began again in her neat fashion, with precisely
the same words as before.  Fred, who had also seated himself near,
would have felt unmixed triumph in Mary's effectiveness if Mr.
Farebrother had not been looking at her with evident admiration, while
he dramatized an intense interest in the tale to please the children.

"You will never care any more about my one-eyed giant, Loo," said Fred
at the end.

"Yes, I shall.  Tell about him now," said Louisa.

"Oh, I dare say; I am quite cut out.  Ask Mr. Farebrother."

"Yes," added Mary; "ask Mr. Farebrother to tell you about the ants
whose beautiful house was knocked down by a giant named Tom, and he
thought they didn't mind because he couldn't hear them cry, or see them
use their pocket-handkerchiefs."

"Please," said Louisa, looking up at the Vicar.

"No, no, I am a grave old parson.  If I try to draw a story out of my
bag a sermon comes instead.  Shall I preach you a sermon?" said he,
putting on his short-sighted glasses, and pursing up his lips.

"Yes," said Louisa, falteringly.

"Let me see, then.  Against cakes: how cakes are bad things, especially
if they are sweet and have plums in them."

Louisa took the affair rather seriously, and got down from the Vicar's
knee to go to Fred.

"Ah, I see it will not do to preach on New Year's Day," said Mr.
Farebrother, rising and walking away.  He had discovered of late that
Fred had become jealous of him, and also that he himself was not losing
his preference for Mary above all other women.

"A delightful young person is Miss Garth," said Mrs. Farebrother, who
had been watching her son's movements.

"Yes," said Mrs. Vincy, obliged to reply, as the old lady turned to her
expectantly.  "It is a pity she is not better-looking."

"I cannot say that," said Mrs. Farebrother, decisively.  "I like her
countenance.  We must not always ask for beauty, when a good God has
seen fit to make an excellent young woman without it.  I put good
manners first, and Miss Garth will know how to conduct herself in any
station."

The old lady was a little sharp in her tone, having a prospective
reference to Mary's becoming her daughter-in-law; for there was this
inconvenience in Mary's position with regard to Fred, that it was not
suitable to be made public, and hence the three ladies at Lowick
Parsonage were still hoping that Camden would choose Miss Garth.

New visitors entered, and the drawing-room was given up to music and
games, while whist-tables were prepared in the quiet room on the other
side of the hall.  Mr. Farebrother played a rubber to satisfy his
mother, who regarded her occasional whist as a protest against scandal
and novelty of opinion, in which light even a revoke had its dignity.
But at the end he got Mr. Chichely to take his place, and left the
room.  As he crossed the hall, Lydgate had just come in and was taking
off his great-coat.

"You are the man I was going to look for," said the Vicar; and instead
of entering the drawing-room, they walked along the hall and stood
against the fireplace, where the frosty air helped to make a glowing
bank.  "You see, I can leave the whist-table easily enough," he went
on, smiling at Lydgate, "now I don't play for money.  I owe that to
you, Mrs. Casaubon says."

"How?" said Lydgate, coldly.

"Ah, you didn't mean me to know it; I call that ungenerous reticence.
You should let a man have the pleasure of feeling that you have done
him a good turn.  I don't enter into some people's dislike of being
under an obligation: upon my word, I prefer being under an obligation
to everybody for behaving well to me."

"I can't tell what you mean," said Lydgate, "unless it is that I once
spoke of you to Mrs. Casaubon.  But I did not think that she would
break her promise not to mention that I had done so," said Lydgate,
leaning his back against the corner of the mantel-piece, and showing no
radiance in his face.

"It was Brooke who let it out, only the other day.  He paid me the
compliment of saying that he was very glad I had the living though you
had come across his tactics, and had praised me up as a lien and a
Tillotson, and that sort of thing, till Mrs. Casaubon would hear of no
one else."

"Oh, Brooke is such a leaky-minded fool," said Lydgate, contemptuously.

"Well, I was glad of the leakiness then.  I don't see why you shouldn't
like me to know that you wished to do me a service, my dear fellow.
And you certainly have done me one.  It's rather a strong check to
one's self-complacency to find how much of one's right doing depends on
not being in want of money.  A man will not be tempted to say the
Lord's Prayer backward to please the devil, if he doesn't want the
devil's services.  I have no need to hang on the smiles of chance now."

"I don't see that there's any money-getting without chance," said
Lydgate; "if a man gets it in a profession, it's pretty sure to come by
chance."

Mr. Farebrother thought he could account for this speech, in striking
contrast with Lydgate's former way of talking, as the perversity which
will often spring from the moodiness of a man ill at ease in his
affairs.  He answered in a tone of good-humored admission--

"Ah, there's enormous patience wanted with the way of the world.  But
it is the easier for a man to wait patiently when he has friends who
love him, and ask for nothing better than to help him through, so far
as it lies in their power."

"Oh yes," said Lydgate, in a careless tone, changing his attitude and
looking at his watch.  "People make much more of their difficulties
than they need to do."

He knew as distinctly as possible that this was an offer of help to
himself from Mr. Farebrother, and he could not bear it.  So strangely
determined are we mortals, that, after having been long gratified with
the sense that he had privately done the Vicar a service, the
suggestion that the Vicar discerned his need of a service in return
made him shrink into unconquerable reticence.  Besides, behind all
making of such offers what else must come?--that he should "mention his
case," imply that he wanted specific things.  At that moment, suicide
seemed easier.

Mr. Farebrother was too keen a man not to know the meaning of that
reply, and there was a certain massiveness in Lydgate's manner and
tone, corresponding with his physique, which if he repelled your
advances in the first instance seemed to put persuasive devices out of
question.

"What time are you?" said the Vicar, devouring his wounded feeling.

"After eleven," said Lydgate.  And they went into the drawing-room.



CHAPTER LXIV.

    1st Gent. Where lies the power, there let the blame lie too.
    2d Gent.  Nay, power is relative; you cannot fright
                  The coming pest with border fortresses,
                  Or catch your carp with subtle argument.
                  All force is twain in one: cause is not cause
                  Unless effect be there; and action's self
                  Must needs contain a passive.  So command
                  Exists but with obedience."


Even if Lydgate had been inclined to be quite open about his affairs,
he knew that it would have hardly been in Mr. Farebrother's power to
give him the help he immediately wanted.  With the year's bills coming
in from his tradesmen, with Dover's threatening hold on his furniture,
and with nothing to depend on but slow dribbling payments from patients
who must not be offended--for the handsome fees he had had from
Freshitt Hall and Lowick Manor had been easily absorbed--nothing less
than a thousand pounds would have freed him from actual embarrassment,
and left a residue which, according to the favorite phrase of
hopefulness in such circumstances, would have given him "time to look
about him."

Naturally, the merry Christmas bringing the happy New Year, when
fellow-citizens expect to be paid for the trouble and goods they have
smilingly bestowed on their neighbors, had so tightened the pressure of
sordid cares on Lydgate's mind that it was hardly possible for him to
think unbrokenly of any other subject, even the most habitual and
soliciting.  He was not an ill-tempered man; his intellectual activity,
the ardent kindness of his heart, as well as his strong frame, would
always, under tolerably easy conditions, have kept him above the petty
uncontrolled susceptibilities which make bad temper.  But he was now a
prey to that worst irritation which arises not simply from annoyances,
but from the second consciousness underlying those annoyances, of
wasted energy and a degrading preoccupation, which was the reverse of
all his former purposes.  "_This_ is what I am thinking of; and _that_
is what I might have been thinking of," was the bitter incessant murmur
within him, making every difficulty a double goad to impatience.

Some gentlemen have made an amazing figure in literature by general
discontent with the universe as a trap of dulness into which their
great souls have fallen by mistake; but the sense of a stupendous self
and an insignificant world may have its consolations.  Lydgate's
discontent was much harder to bear: it was the sense that there was a
grand existence in thought and effective action lying around him, while
his self was being narrowed into the miserable isolation of egoistic
fears, and vulgar anxieties for events that might allay such fears.
His troubles will perhaps appear miserably sordid, and beneath the
attention of lofty persons who can know nothing of debt except on a
magnificent scale.  Doubtless they were sordid; and for the majority,
who are not lofty, there is no escape from sordidness but by being free
from money-craving, with all its base hopes and temptations, its
watching for death, its hinted requests, its horse-dealer's desire to
make bad work pass for good, its seeking for function which ought to be
another's, its compulsion often to long for Luck in the shape of a wide
calamity.

It was because Lydgate writhed under the idea of getting his neck
beneath this vile yoke that he had fallen into a bitter moody state
which was continually widening Rosamond's alienation from him.  After
the first disclosure about the bill of sale, he had made many efforts
to draw her into sympathy with him about possible measures for
narrowing their expenses, and with the threatening approach of
Christmas his propositions grew more and more definite.  "We two can do
with only one servant, and live on very little," he said, "and I shall
manage with one horse."  For Lydgate, as we have seen, had begun to
reason, with a more distinct vision, about the expenses of living, and
any share of pride he had given to appearances of that sort was meagre
compared with the pride which made him revolt from exposure as a
debtor, or from asking men to help him with their money.

"Of course you can dismiss the other two servants, if you like," said
Rosamond; "but I should have thought it would be very injurious to your
position for us to live in a poor way.  You must expect your practice
to be lowered."

"My dear Rosamond, it is not a question of choice.  We have begun too
expensively.  Peacock, you know, lived in a much smaller house than
this.  It is my fault: I ought to have known better, and I deserve a
thrashing--if there were anybody who had a right to give it me--for
bringing you into the necessity of living in a poorer way than you have
been used to.  But we married because we loved each other, I suppose.
And that may help us to pull along till things get better.  Come, dear,
put down that work and come to me."

He was really in chill gloom about her at that moment, but he dreaded a
future without affection, and was determined to resist the oncoming of
division between them.  Rosamond obeyed him, and he took her on his
knee, but in her secret soul she was utterly aloof from him.  The poor
thing saw only that the world was not ordered to her liking, and
Lydgate was part of that world.  But he held her waist with one hand
and laid the other gently on both of hers; for this rather abrupt man
had much tenderness in his manners towards women, seeming to have
always present in his imagination the weakness of their frames and the
delicate poise of their health both in body and mind.  And he began
again to speak persuasively.

"I find, now I look into things a little, Rosy, that it is wonderful
what an amount of money slips away in our housekeeping.  I suppose the
servants are careless, and we have had a great many people coming.  But
there must be many in our rank who manage with much less: they must do
with commoner things, I suppose, and look after the scraps.  It seems,
money goes but a little way in these matters, for Wrench has everything
as plain as possible, and he has a very large practice."

"Oh, if you think of living as the Wrenches do!" said Rosamond, with a
little turn of her neck.  "But I have heard you express your disgust at
that way of living."

"Yes, they have bad taste in everything--they make economy look ugly.
We needn't do that.  I only meant that they avoid expenses, although
Wrench has a capital practice."

"Why should not you have a good practice, Tertius?  Mr. Peacock had.
You should be more careful not to offend people, and you should send
out medicines as the others do.  I am sure you began well, and you got
several good houses.  It cannot answer to be eccentric; you should
think what will be generally liked," said Rosamond, in a decided little
tone of admonition.

Lydgate's anger rose: he was prepared to be indulgent towards feminine
weakness, but not towards feminine dictation.  The shallowness of a
waternixie's soul may have a charm until she becomes didactic.  But he
controlled himself, and only said, with a touch of despotic firmness--

"What I am to do in my practice, Rosy, it is for me to judge.  That is
not the question between us.  It is enough for you to know that our
income is likely to be a very narrow one--hardly four hundred, perhaps
less, for a long time to come, and we must try to re-arrange our lives
in accordance with that fact."

Rosamond was silent for a moment or two, looking before her, and then
said, "My uncle Bulstrode ought to allow you a salary for the time you
give to the Hospital: it is not right that you should work for nothing."

"It was understood from the beginning that my services would be
gratuitous.  That, again, need not enter into our discussion.  I have
pointed out what is the only probability," said Lydgate, impatiently.
Then checking himself, he went on more quietly--

"I think I see one resource which would free us from a good deal of the
present difficulty.  I hear that young Ned Plymdale is going to be
married to Miss Sophy Toller.  They are rich, and it is not often that
a good house is vacant in Middlemarch.  I feel sure that they would be
glad to take this house from us with most of our furniture, and they
would be willing to pay handsomely for the lease.  I can employ
Trumbull to speak to Plymdale about it."

Rosamond left her husband's knee and walked slowly to the other end of
the room; when she turned round and walked towards him it was evident
that the tears had come, and that she was biting her under-lip and
clasping her hands to keep herself from crying.  Lydgate was
wretched--shaken with anger and yet feeling that it would be unmanly to
vent the anger just now.

"I am very sorry, Rosamond; I know this is painful."

"I thought, at least, when I had borne to send the plate back and have
that man taking an inventory of the furniture--I should have thought
_that_ would suffice."

"I explained it to you at the time, dear.  That was only a security and
behind that security there is a debt.  And that debt must be paid
within the next few months, else we shall have our furniture sold.  If
young Plymdale will take our house and most of our furniture, we shall
be able to pay that debt, and some others too, and we shall be quit of
a place too expensive for us.  We might take a smaller house: Trumbull,
I know, has a very decent one to let at thirty pounds a-year, and this
is ninety."  Lydgate uttered this speech in the curt hammering way with
which we usually try to nail down a vague mind to imperative facts.
Tears rolled silently down Rosamond's cheeks; she just pressed her
handkerchief against them, and stood looking at the large vase on the
mantel-piece. It was a moment of more intense bitterness than she had
ever felt before.  At last she said, without hurry and with careful
emphasis--

"I never could have believed that you would like to act in that way."

"Like it?" burst out Lydgate, rising from his chair, thrusting his
hands in his pockets and stalking away from the hearth; "it's not a
question of liking.  Of course, I don't like it; it's the only thing I
can do."  He wheeled round there, and turned towards her.

"I should have thought there were many other means than that," said
Rosamond.  "Let us have a sale and leave Middlemarch altogether."

"To do what?  What is the use of my leaving my work in Middlemarch to
go where I have none?  We should be just as penniless elsewhere as we
are here," said Lydgate still more angrily.

"If we are to be in that position it will be entirely your own doing,
Tertius," said Rosamond, turning round to speak with the fullest
conviction.  "You will not behave as you ought to do to your own
family.  You offended Captain Lydgate.  Sir Godwin was very kind to me
when we were at Quallingham, and I am sure if you showed proper regard
to him and told him your affairs, he would do anything for you.  But
rather than that, you like giving up our house and furniture to Mr. Ned
Plymdale."

There was something like fierceness in Lydgate's eyes, as he answered
with new violence, "Well, then, if you will have it so, I do like it.
I admit that I like it better than making a fool of myself by going to
beg where it's of no use.  Understand then, that it is what I _like to
do._"

There was a tone in the last sentence which was equivalent to the
clutch of his strong hand on Rosamond's delicate arm.  But for all
that, his will was not a whit stronger than hers.  She immediately
walked out of the room in silence, but with an intense determination to
hinder what Lydgate liked to do.

He went out of the house, but as his blood cooled he felt that the
chief result of the discussion was a deposit of dread within him at the
idea of opening with his wife in future subjects which might again urge
him to violent speech.  It was as if a fracture in delicate crystal had
begun, and he was afraid of any movement that might make it fatal.  His
marriage would be a mere piece of bitter irony if they could not go on
loving each other.  He had long ago made up his mind to what he thought
was her negative character--her want of sensibility, which showed
itself in disregard both of his specific wishes and of his general
aims.  The first great disappointment had been borne: the tender
devotedness and docile adoration of the ideal wife must be renounced,
and life must be taken up on a lower stage of expectation, as it is by
men who have lost their limbs.  But the real wife had not only her
claims, she had still a hold on his heart, and it was his intense
desire that the hold should remain strong.  In marriage, the certainty,
"She will never love me much," is easier to bear than the fear, "I
shall love her no more."  Hence, after that outburst, his inward effort
was entirely to excuse her, and to blame the hard circumstances which
were partly his fault.  He tried that evening, by petting her, to heal
the wound he had made in the morning, and it was not in Rosamond's
nature to be repellent or sulky; indeed, she welcomed the signs that
her husband loved her and was under control.  But this was something
quite distinct from loving _him_. Lydgate would not have chosen soon to
recur to the plan of parting with the house; he was resolved to carry
it out, and say as little more about it as possible.  But Rosamond
herself touched on it at breakfast by saying, mildly--

"Have you spoken to Trumbull yet?"

"No," said Lydgate, "but I shall call on him as I go by this morning.
No time must be lost."  He took Rosamond's question as a sign that she
withdrew her inward opposition, and kissed her head caressingly when he
got up to go away.

As soon as it was late enough to make a call, Rosamond went to Mrs.
Plymdale, Mr. Ned's mother, and entered with pretty congratulations
into the subject of the coming marriage.  Mrs. Plymdale's maternal view
was, that Rosamond might possibly now have retrospective glimpses of
her own folly; and feeling the advantages to be at present all on the
side of her son, was too kind a woman not to behave graciously.

"Yes, Ned is most happy, I must say.  And Sophy Toller is all I could
desire in a daughter-in-law. Of course her father is able to do
something handsome for her--that is only what would be expected with a
brewery like his.  And the connection is everything we should desire.
But that is not what I look at.  She is such a very nice girl--no airs,
no pretensions, though on a level with the first.  I don't mean with
the titled aristocracy.  I see very little good in people aiming out of
their own sphere.  I mean that Sophy is equal to the best in the town,
and she is contented with that."

"I have always thought her very agreeable," said Rosamond.

"I look upon it as a reward for Ned, who never held his head too high,
that he should have got into the very best connection," continued Mrs.
Plymdale, her native sharpness softened by a fervid sense that she was
taking a correct view.  "And such particular people as the Tollers are,
they might have objected because some of our friends are not theirs.
It is well known that your aunt Bulstrode and I have been intimate from
our youth, and Mr. Plymdale has been always on Mr. Bulstrode's side.
And I myself prefer serious opinions.  But the Tollers have welcomed
Ned all the same."

"I am sure he is a very deserving, well-principled young man," said
Rosamond, with a neat air of patronage in return for Mrs. Plymdale's
wholesome corrections.

"Oh, he has not the style of a captain in the army, or that sort of
carriage as if everybody was beneath him, or that showy kind of
talking, and singing, and intellectual talent.  But I am thankful he
has not.  It is a poor preparation both for here and Hereafter."

"Oh dear, yes; appearances have very little to do with happiness," said
Rosamond.  "I think there is every prospect of their being a happy
couple.  What house will they take?"

"Oh, as for that, they must put up with what they can get.  They have
been looking at the house in St. Peter's Place, next to Mr. Hackbutt's;
it belongs to him, and he is putting it nicely in repair.  I suppose
they are not likely to hear of a better.  Indeed, I think Ned will
decide the matter to-day."

"I should think it is a nice house; I like St. Peter's Place."

"Well, it is near the Church, and a genteel situation.  But the windows
are narrow, and it is all ups and downs.  You don't happen to know of
any other that would be at liberty?" said Mrs. Plymdale, fixing her
round black eyes on Rosamond with the animation of a sudden thought in
them.

"Oh no; I hear so little of those things."

Rosamond had not foreseen that question and answer in setting out to
pay her visit; she had simply meant to gather any information which
would help her to avert the parting with her own house under
circumstances thoroughly disagreeable to her.  As to the untruth in her
reply, she no more reflected on it than she did on the untruth there
was in her saying that appearances had very little to do with
happiness.  Her object, she was convinced, was thoroughly justifiable:
it was Lydgate whose intention was inexcusable; and there was a plan in
her mind which, when she had carried it out fully, would prove how very
false a step it would have been for him to have descended from his
position.

She returned home by Mr. Borthrop Trumbull's office, meaning to call
there.  It was the first time in her life that Rosamond had thought of
doing anything in the form of business, but she felt equal to the
occasion.  That she should be obliged to do what she intensely
disliked, was an idea which turned her quiet tenacity into active
invention.  Here was a case in which it could not be enough simply to
disobey and be serenely, placidly obstinate: she must act according to
her judgment, and she said to herself that her judgment was
right--"indeed, if it had not been, she would not have wished to act on
it."

Mr. Trumbull was in the back-room of his office, and received Rosamond
with his finest manners, not only because he had much sensibility to
her charms, but because the good-natured fibre in him was stirred by
his certainty that Lydgate was in difficulties, and that this
uncommonly pretty woman--this young lady with the highest personal
attractions--was likely to feel the pinch of trouble--to find herself
involved in circumstances beyond her control.  He begged her to do him
the honor to take a seat, and stood before her trimming and comporting
himself with an eager solicitude, which was chiefly benevolent.
Rosamond's first question was, whether her husband had called on Mr.
Trumbull that morning, to speak about disposing of their house.

"Yes, ma'am, yes, he did; he did so," said the good auctioneer, trying
to throw something soothing into his iteration.  "I was about to fulfil
his order, if possible, this afternoon.  He wished me not to
procrastinate."

"I called to tell you not to go any further, Mr. Trumbull; and I beg of
you not to mention what has been said on the subject.  Will you oblige
me?"

"Certainly I will, Mrs. Lydgate, certainly.  Confidence is sacred with
me on business or any other topic.  I am then to consider the
commission withdrawn?" said Mr. Trumbull, adjusting the long ends of
his blue cravat with both hands, and looking at Rosamond deferentially.

"Yes, if you please.  I find that Mr. Ned Plymdale has taken a house--the
one in St. Peter's Place next to Mr. Hackbutt's. Mr. Lydgate would be
annoyed that his orders should be fulfilled uselessly.  And besides
that, there are other circumstances which render the proposal
unnecessary."

"Very good, Mrs. Lydgate, very good.  I am at your commands, whenever
you require any service of me," said Mr. Trumbull, who felt pleasure in
conjecturing that some new resources had been opened.  "Rely on me, I
beg.  The affair shall go no further."

That evening Lydgate was a little comforted by observing that Rosamond
was more lively than she had usually been of late, and even seemed
interested in doing what would please him without being asked.  He
thought, "If she will be happy and I can rub through, what does it all
signify?  It is only a narrow swamp that we have to pass in a long
journey.  If I can get my mind clear again, I shall do."

He was so much cheered that he began to search for an account of
experiments which he had long ago meant to look up, and had neglected
out of that creeping self-despair which comes in the train of petty
anxieties.  He felt again some of the old delightful absorption in a
far-reaching inquiry, while Rosamond played the quiet music which was
as helpful to his meditation as the plash of an oar on the evening
lake.  It was rather late; he had pushed away all the books, and was
looking at the fire with his hands clasped behind his head in
forgetfulness of everything except the construction of a new
controlling experiment, when Rosamond, who had left the piano and was
leaning back in her chair watching him, said--

"Mr. Ned Plymdale has taken a house already."

Lydgate, startled and jarred, looked up in silence for a moment, like a
man who has been disturbed in his sleep.  Then flushing with an
unpleasant consciousness, he asked--

"How do you know?"

"I called at Mrs. Plymdale's this morning, and she told me that he had
taken the house in St. Peter's Place, next to Mr. Hackbutt's."

Lydgate was silent.  He drew his hands from behind his head and pressed
them against the hair which was hanging, as it was apt to do, in a mass
on his forehead, while he rested his elbows on his knees.  He was
feeling bitter disappointment, as if he had opened a door out of a
suffocating place and had found it walled up; but he also felt sure
that Rosamond was pleased with the cause of his disappointment.  He
preferred not looking at her and not speaking, until he had got over
the first spasm of vexation.  After all, he said in his bitterness,
what can a woman care about so much as house and furniture? a husband
without them is an absurdity.  When he looked up and pushed his hair
aside, his dark eyes had a miserable blank non-expectance of sympathy
in them, but he only said, coolly--

"Perhaps some one else may turn up.  I told Trumbull to be on the
look-out if he failed with Plymdale."

Rosamond made no remark.  She trusted to the chance that nothing more
would pass between her husband and the auctioneer until some issue
should have justified her interference; at any rate, she had hindered
the event which she immediately dreaded.  After a pause, she said--

"How much money is it that those disagreeable people want?"

"What disagreeable people?"

"Those who took the list--and the others.  I mean, how much money would
satisfy them so that you need not be troubled any more?"

Lydgate surveyed her for a moment, as if he were looking for symptoms,
and then said, "Oh, if I could have got six hundred from Plymdale for
furniture and as premium, I might have managed.  I could have paid off
Dover, and given enough on account to the others to make them wait
patiently, if we contracted our expenses."

"But I mean how much should you want if we stayed in this house?"

"More than I am likely to get anywhere," said Lydgate, with rather a
grating sarcasm in his tone.  It angered him to perceive that
Rosamond's mind was wandering over impracticable wishes instead of
facing possible efforts.

"Why should you not mention the sum?" said Rosamond, with a mild
indication that she did not like his manners.

"Well," said Lydgate in a guessing tone, "it would take at least a
thousand to set me at ease.  But," he added, incisively, "I have to
consider what I shall do without it, not with it."

Rosamond said no more.

But the next day she carried out her plan of writing to Sir Godwin
Lydgate.  Since the Captain's visit, she had received a letter from
him, and also one from Mrs. Mengan, his married sister, condoling with
her on the loss of her baby, and expressing vaguely the hope that they
should see her again at Quallingham.  Lydgate had told her that this
politeness meant nothing; but she was secretly convinced that any
backwardness in Lydgate's family towards him was due to his cold and
contemptuous behavior, and she had answered the letters in her most
charming manner, feeling some confidence that a specific invitation
would follow.  But there had been total silence.  The Captain evidently
was not a great penman, and Rosamond reflected that the sisters might
have been abroad.  However, the season was come for thinking of friends
at home, and at any rate Sir Godwin, who had chucked her under the
chin, and pronounced her to be like the celebrated beauty, Mrs. Croly,
who had made a conquest of him in 1790, would be touched by any appeal
from her, and would find it pleasant for her sake to behave as he ought
to do towards his nephew.  Rosamond was naively convinced of what an
old gentleman ought to do to prevent her from suffering annoyance.  And
she wrote what she considered the most judicious letter possible--one
which would strike Sir Godwin as a proof of her excellent sense--pointing
out how desirable it was that Tertius should quit such a place
as Middlemarch for one more fitted to his talents, how the unpleasant
character of the inhabitants had hindered his professional success, and
how in consequence he was in money difficulties, from which it would
require a thousand pounds thoroughly to extricate him.  She did not say
that Tertius was unaware of her intention to write; for she had the
idea that his supposed sanction of her letter would be in accordance
with what she did say of his great regard for his uncle Godwin as the
relative who had always been his best friend.  Such was the force of
Poor Rosamond's tactics now she applied them to affairs.

This had happened before the party on New Year's Day, and no answer had
yet come from Sir Godwin.  But on the morning of that day Lydgate had
to learn that Rosamond had revoked his order to Borthrop Trumbull.
Feeling it necessary that she should be gradually accustomed to the
idea of their quitting the house in Lowick Gate, he overcame his
reluctance to speak to her again on the subject, and when they were
breakfasting said--

"I shall try to see Trumbull this morning, and tell him to advertise
the house in the 'Pioneer' and the 'Trumpet.' If the thing were
advertised, some one might be inclined to take it who would not
otherwise have thought of a change.  In these country places many
people go on in their old houses when their families are too large for
them, for want of knowing where they can find another.  And Trumbull
seems to have got no bite at all."

Rosamond knew that the inevitable moment was come.  "I ordered Trumbull
not to inquire further," she said, with a careful calmness which was
evidently defensive.

Lydgate stared at her in mute amazement.  Only half an hour before he
had been fastening up her plaits for her, and talking the "little
language" of affection, which Rosamond, though not returning it,
accepted as if she had been a serene and lovely image, now and then
miraculously dimpling towards her votary.  With such fibres still astir
in him, the shock he received could not at once be distinctly anger; it
was confused pain.  He laid down the knife and fork with which he was
carving, and throwing himself back in his chair, said at last, with a
cool irony in his tone--

"May I ask when and why you did so?"

"When I knew that the Plymdales had taken a house, I called to tell him
not to mention ours to them; and at the same time I told him not to let
the affair go on any further.  I knew that it would be very injurious
to you if it were known that you wished to part with your house and
furniture, and I had a very strong objection to it.  I think that was
reason enough."

"It was of no consequence then that I had told you imperative reasons
of another kind; of no consequence that I had come to a different
conclusion, and given an order accordingly?" said Lydgate, bitingly,
the thunder and lightning gathering about his brow and eyes.

The effect of any one's anger on Rosamond had always been to make her
shrink in cold dislike, and to become all the more calmly correct, in
the conviction that she was not the person to misbehave whatever others
might do.  She replied--

"I think I had a perfect right to speak on a subject which concerns me
at least as much as you."

"Clearly--you had a right to speak, but only to me.  You had no right
to contradict my orders secretly, and treat me as if I were a fool,"
said Lydgate, in the same tone as before.  Then with some added scorn,
"Is it possible to make you understand what the consequences will be?
Is it of any use for me to tell you again why we must try to part with
the house?"

"It is not necessary for you to tell me again," said Rosamond, in a
voice that fell and trickled like cold water-drops. "I remembered what
you said.  You spoke just as violently as you do now.  But that does
not alter my opinion that you ought to try every other means rather
than take a step which is so painful to me.  And as to advertising the
house, I think it would be perfectly degrading to you."

"And suppose I disregard your opinion as you disregard mine?"

"You can do so, of course.  But I think you ought to have told me
before we were married that you would place me in the worst position,
rather than give up your own will."

Lydgate did not speak, but tossed his head on one side, and twitched
the corners of his mouth in despair.  Rosamond, seeing that he was not
looking at her, rose and set his cup of coffee before him; but he took
no notice of it, and went on with an inward drama and argument,
occasionally moving in his seat, resting one arm on the table, and
rubbing his hand against his hair.  There was a conflux of emotions and
thoughts in him that would not let him either give thorough way to his
anger or persevere with simple rigidity of resolve.  Rosamond took
advantage of his silence.

"When we were married everyone felt that your position was very high.
I could not have imagined then that you would want to sell our
furniture, and take a house in Bride Street, where the rooms are like
cages.  If we are to live in that way let us at least leave
Middlemarch."

"These would be very strong considerations," said Lydgate, half
ironically--still there was a withered paleness about his lips as he
looked at his coffee, and did not drink--"these would be very strong
considerations if I did not happen to be in debt."

"Many persons must have been in debt in the same way, but if they are
respectable, people trust them.  I am sure I have heard papa say that
the Torbits were in debt, and they went on very well.  It cannot be
good to act rashly," said Rosamond, with serene wisdom.

Lydgate sat paralyzed by opposing impulses: since no reasoning he could
apply to Rosamond seemed likely to conquer her assent, he wanted to
smash and grind some object on which he could at least produce an
impression, or else to tell her brutally that he was master, and she
must obey.  But he not only dreaded the effect of such extremities on
their mutual life--he had a growing dread of Rosamond's quiet elusive
obstinacy, which would not allow any assertion of power to be final;
and again, she had touched him in a spot of keenest feeling by implying
that she had been deluded with a false vision of happiness in marrying
him.  As to saying that he was master, it was not the fact.  The very
resolution to which he had wrought himself by dint of logic and
honorable pride was beginning to relax under her torpedo contact.  He
swallowed half his cup of coffee, and then rose to go.

"I may at least request that you will not go to Trumbull at
present--until it has been seen that there are no other means," said
Rosamond.  Although she was not subject to much fear, she felt it safer
not to betray that she had written to Sir Godwin.  "Promise me that you
will not go to him for a few weeks, or without telling me."

Lydgate gave a short laugh.  "I think it is I who should exact a
promise that you will do nothing without telling me," he said, turning
his eyes sharply upon her, and then moving to the door.

"You remember that we are going to dine at papa's," said Rosamond,
wishing that he should turn and make a more thorough concession to her.
But he only said "Oh yes," impatiently, and went away.  She held it to
be very odious in him that he did not think the painful propositions he
had had to make to her were enough, without showing so unpleasant a
temper.  And when she put the moderate request that he would defer
going to Trumbull again, it was cruel in him not to assure her of what
he meant to do.  She was convinced of her having acted in every way for
the best; and each grating or angry speech of Lydgate's served only as
an addition to the register of offences in her mind.  Poor Rosamond for
months had begun to associate her husband with feelings of
disappointment, and the terribly inflexible relation of marriage had
lost its charm of encouraging delightful dreams.  It had freed her from
the disagreeables of her father's house, but it had not given her
everything that she had wished and hoped.  The Lydgate with whom she
had been in love had been a group of airy conditions for her, most of
which had disappeared, while their place had been taken by every-day
details which must be lived through slowly from hour to hour, not
floated through with a rapid selection of favorable aspects.  The
habits of Lydgate's profession, his home preoccupation with scientific
subjects, which seemed to her almost like a morbid vampire's taste, his
peculiar views of things which had never entered into the dialogue of
courtship--all these continually alienating influences, even without
the fact of his having placed himself at a disadvantage in the town,
and without that first shock of revelation about Dover's debt, would
have made his presence dull to her.  There was another presence which
ever since the early days of her marriage, until four months ago, had
been an agreeable excitement, but that was gone: Rosamond would not
confess to herself how much the consequent blank had to do with her
utter ennui; and it seemed to her (perhaps she was right) that an
invitation to Quallingham, and an opening for Lydgate to settle
elsewhere than in Middlemarch--in London, or somewhere likely to be
free from unpleasantness--would satisfy her quite well, and make her
indifferent to the absence of Will Ladislaw, towards whom she felt some
resentment for his exaltation of Mrs. Casaubon.

That was the state of things with Lydgate and Rosamond on the New
Year's Day when they dined at her father's, she looking mildly neutral
towards him in remembrance of his ill-tempered behavior at breakfast,
and he carrying a much deeper effect from the inward conflict in which
that morning scene was only one of many epochs.  His flushed effort
while talking to Mr. Farebrother--his effort after the cynical pretence
that all ways of getting money are essentially the same, and that
chance has an empire which reduces choice to a fool's illusion--was but
the symptom of a wavering resolve, a benumbed response to the old
stimuli of enthusiasm.

What was he to do?  He saw even more keenly than Rosamond did the
dreariness of taking her into the small house in Bride Street, where
she would have scanty furniture around her and discontent within: a
life of privation and life with Rosamond were two images which had
become more and more irreconcilable ever since the threat of privation
had disclosed itself.  But even if his resolves had forced the two
images into combination, the useful preliminaries to that hard change
were not visibly within reach.  And though he had not given the promise
which his wife had asked for, he did not go again to Trumbull.  He even
began to think of taking a rapid journey to the North and seeing Sir
Godwin.  He had once believed that nothing would urge him into making
an application for money to his uncle, but he had not then known the
full pressure of alternatives yet more disagreeable.  He could not
depend on the effect of a letter; it was only in an interview, however
disagreeable this might be to himself, that he could give a thorough
explanation and could test the effectiveness of kinship.  No sooner had
Lydgate begun to represent this step to himself as the easiest than
there was a reaction of anger that he--he who had long ago determined
to live aloof from such abject calculations, such self-interested
anxiety about the inclinations and the pockets of men with whom he had
been proud to have no aims in common--should have fallen not simply to
their level, but to the level of soliciting them.



CHAPTER LXV.

    "One of us two must bowen douteless,
     And, sith a man is more reasonable
     Than woman is, ye [men] moste be suffrable.
                             --CHAUCER: Canterbury Tales.


The bias of human nature to be slow in correspondence triumphs even
over the present quickening in the general pace of things: what wonder
then that in 1832 old Sir Godwin Lydgate was slow to write a letter
which was of consequence to others rather than to himself?  Nearly
three weeks of the new year were gone, and Rosamond, awaiting an answer
to her winning appeal, was every day disappointed.  Lydgate, in total
ignorance of her expectations, was seeing the bills come in, and
feeling that Dover's use of his advantage over other creditors was
imminent.  He had never mentioned to Rosamond his brooding purpose of
going to Quallingham: he did not want to admit what would appear to her
a concession to her wishes after indignant refusal, until the last
moment; but he was really expecting to set off soon.  A slice of the
railway would enable him to manage the whole journey and back in four
days.

But one morning after Lydgate had gone out, a letter came addressed to
him, which Rosamond saw clearly to be from Sir Godwin.  She was full of
hope.  Perhaps there might be a particular note to her enclosed; but
Lydgate was naturally addressed on the question of money or other aid,
and the fact that he was written to, nay, the very delay in writing at
all, seemed to certify that the answer was thoroughly compliant.  She
was too much excited by these thoughts to do anything but light
stitching in a warm corner of the dining-room, with the outside of this
momentous letter lying on the table before her.  About twelve she heard
her husband's step in the passage, and tripping to open the door, she
said in her lightest tones, "Tertius, come in here--here is a letter
for you."

"Ah?" he said, not taking off his hat, but just turning her round
within his arm to walk towards the spot where the letter lay.  "My
uncle Godwin!" he exclaimed, while Rosamond reseated herself, and
watched him as he opened the letter.  She had expected him to be
surprised.

While Lydgate's eyes glanced rapidly over the brief letter, she saw his
face, usually of a pale brown, taking on a dry whiteness; with nostrils
and lips quivering he tossed down the letter before her, and said
violently--

"It will be impossible to endure life with you, if you will always be
acting secretly--acting in opposition to me and hiding your actions."

He checked his speech and turned his back on her--then wheeled round
and walked about, sat down, and got up again restlessly, grasping hard
the objects deep down in his pockets.  He was afraid of saying
something irremediably cruel.

Rosamond too had changed color as she read.  The letter ran in this
way:--

"DEAR TERTIUS,--Don't set your wife to write to me when you have
anything to ask.  It is a roundabout wheedling sort of thing which I
should not have credited you with.  I never choose to write to a woman
on matters of business.  As to my supplying you with a thousand pounds,
or only half that sum, I can do nothing of the sort.  My own family
drains me to the last penny.  With two younger sons and three
daughters, I am not likely to have cash to spare.  You seem to have got
through your own money pretty quickly, and to have made a mess where
you are; the sooner you go somewhere else the better.  But I have
nothing to do with men of your profession, and can't help you there.  I
did the best I could for you as guardian, and let you have your own way
in taking to medicine.  You might have gone into the army or the
Church.  Your money would have held out for that, and there would have
been a surer ladder before you.  Your uncle Charles has had a grudge
against you for not going into his profession, but not I. I have always
wished you well, but you must consider yourself on your own legs
entirely now.

                Your affectionate uncle,
                        GODWIN LYDGATE."

When Rosamond had finished reading the letter she sat quite still, with
her hands folded before her, restraining any show of her keen
disappointment, and intrenching herself in quiet passivity under her
husband's wrath.  Lydgate paused in his movements, looked at her again,
and said, with biting severity--

"Will this be enough to convince you of the harm you may do by secret
meddling?  Have you sense enough to recognize now your incompetence to
judge and act for me--to interfere with your ignorance in affairs which
it belongs to me to decide on?"

The words were hard; but this was not the first time that Lydgate had
been frustrated by her.  She did not look at him, and made no reply.

"I had nearly resolved on going to Quallingham.  It would have cost me
pain enough to do it, yet it might have been of some use.  But it has
been of no use for me to think of anything.  You have always been
counteracting me secretly.  You delude me with a false assent, and then
I am at the mercy of your devices.  If you mean to resist every wish I
express, say so and defy me.  I shall at least know what I am doing
then."

It is a terrible moment in young lives when the closeness of love's
bond has turned to this power of galling.  In spite of Rosamond's
self-control a tear fell silently and rolled over her lips.  She still
said nothing; but under that quietude was hidden an intense effect: she
was in such entire disgust with her husband that she wished she had
never seen him.  Sir Godwin's rudeness towards her and utter want of
feeling ranged him with Dover and all other creditors--disagreeable
people who only thought of themselves, and did not mind how annoying
they were to her.  Even her father was unkind, and might have done more
for them.  In fact there was but one person in Rosamond's world whom
she did not regard as blameworthy, and that was the graceful creature
with blond plaits and with little hands crossed before her, who had
never expressed herself unbecomingly, and had always acted for the
best--the best naturally being what she best liked.

Lydgate pausing and looking at her began to feel that half-maddening
sense of helplessness which comes over passionate people when their
passion is met by an innocent-looking silence whose meek victimized air
seems to put them in the wrong, and at last infects even the justest
indignation with a doubt of its justice.  He needed to recover the full
sense that he was in the right by moderating his words.

"Can you not see, Rosamond," he began again, trying to be simply grave
and not bitter, "that nothing can be so fatal as a want of openness and
confidence between us?  It has happened again and again that I have
expressed a decided wish, and you have seemed to assent, yet after that
you have secretly disobeyed my wish.  In that way I can never know what
I have to trust to.  There would be some hope for us if you would admit
this.  Am I such an unreasonable, furious brute?  Why should you not be
open with me?"  Still silence.

"Will you only say that you have been mistaken, and that I may depend
on your not acting secretly in future?" said Lydgate, urgently, but
with something of request in his tone which Rosamond was quick to
perceive.  She spoke with coolness.

"I cannot possibly make admissions or promises in answer to such words
as you have used towards me.  I have not been accustomed to language of
that kind.  You have spoken of my 'secret meddling,' and my
'interfering ignorance,' and my 'false assent.'  I have never expressed
myself in that way to you, and I think that you ought to apologize.
You spoke of its being impossible to live with me.  Certainly you have
not made my life pleasant to me of late.  I think it was to be expected
that I should try to avert some of the hardships which our marriage has
brought on me."  Another tear fell as Rosamond ceased speaking, and she
pressed it away as quietly as the first.

Lydgate flung himself into a chair, feeling checkmated.  What place was
there in her mind for a remonstrance to lodge in?  He laid down his
hat, flung an arm over the back of his chair, and looked down for some
moments without speaking.  Rosamond had the double purchase over him of
insensibility to the point of justice in his reproach, and of
sensibility to the undeniable hardships now present in her married
life.  Although her duplicity in the affair of the house had exceeded
what he knew, and had really hindered the Plymdales from knowing of it,
she had no consciousness that her action could rightly be called false.
We are not obliged to identify our own acts according to a strict
classification, any more than the materials of our grocery and clothes.
Rosamond felt that she was aggrieved, and that this was what Lydgate
had to recognize.

As for him, the need of accommodating himself to her nature, which was
inflexible in proportion to its negations, held him as with pincers.
He had begun to have an alarmed foresight of her irrevocable loss of
love for him, and the consequent dreariness of their life.  The ready
fulness of his emotions made this dread alternate quickly with the
first violent movements of his anger.  It would assuredly have been a
vain boast in him to say that he was her master.

"You have not made my life pleasant to me of late"--"the hardships
which our marriage has brought on me"--these words were stinging his
imagination as a pain makes an exaggerated dream.  If he were not only
to sink from his highest resolve, but to sink into the hideous
fettering of domestic hate?

"Rosamond," he said, turning his eyes on her with a melancholy look,
"you should allow for a man's words when he is disappointed and
provoked.  You and I cannot have opposite interests.  I cannot part my
happiness from yours.  If I am angry with you, it is that you seem not
to see how any concealment divides us.  How could I wish to make
anything hard to you either by my words or conduct?  When I hurt you, I
hurt part of my own life.  I should never be angry with you if you
would be quite open with me."

"I have only wished to prevent you from hurrying us into wretchedness
without any necessity," said Rosamond, the tears coming again from a
softened feeling now that her husband had softened.  "It is so very
hard to be disgraced here among all the people we know, and to live in
such a miserable way.  I wish I had died with the baby."

She spoke and wept with that gentleness which makes such words and
tears omnipotent over a loving-hearted man.  Lydgate drew his chair
near to hers and pressed her delicate head against his cheek with his
powerful tender hand.  He only caressed her; he did not say anything;
for what was there to say?  He could not promise to shield her from the
dreaded wretchedness, for he could see no sure means of doing so.  When
he left her to go out again, he told himself that it was ten times
harder for her than for him: he had a life away from home, and constant
appeals to his activity on behalf of others.  He wished to excuse
everything in her if he could--but it was inevitable that in that
excusing mood he should think of her as if she were an animal of
another and feebler species.  Nevertheless she had mastered him.



CHAPTER LXVI.

    "'Tis one thing to be tempted, Escalus,
      Another thing to fall."
                          --Measure for Measure.


Lydgate certainly had good reason to reflect on the service his
practice did him in counteracting his personal cares.  He had no longer
free energy enough for spontaneous research and speculative thinking,
but by the bedside of patients, the direct external calls on his
judgment and sympathies brought the added impulse needed to draw him
out of himself.  It was not simply that beneficent harness of routine
which enables silly men to live respectably and unhappy men to live
calmly--it was a perpetual claim on the immediate fresh application of
thought, and on the consideration of another's need and trial.  Many of
us looking back through life would say that the kindest man we have
ever known has been a medical man, or perhaps that surgeon whose fine
tact, directed by deeply informed perception, has come to us in our
need with a more sublime beneficence than that of miracle-workers. Some
of that twice-blessed mercy was always with Lydgate in his work at the
Hospital or in private houses, serving better than any opiate to quiet
and sustain him under his anxieties and his sense of mental degeneracy.

Mr. Farebrother's suspicion as to the opiate was true, however.  Under
the first galling pressure of foreseen difficulties, and the first
perception that his marriage, if it were not to be a yoked loneliness,
must be a state of effort to go on loving without too much care about
being loved, he had once or twice tried a dose of opium.  But he had no
hereditary constitutional craving after such transient escapes from the
hauntings of misery.  He was strong, could drink a great deal of wine,
but did not care about it; and when the men round him were drinking
spirits, he took sugar and water, having a contemptuous pity even for
the earliest stages of excitement from drink.  It was the same with
gambling.  He had looked on at a great deal of gambling in Paris,
watching it as if it had been a disease.  He was no more tempted by
such winning than he was by drink.  He had said to himself that the
only winning he cared for must be attained by a conscious process of
high, difficult combination tending towards a beneficent result.  The
power he longed for could not be represented by agitated fingers
clutching a heap of coin, or by the half-barbarous, half-idiotic
triumph in the eyes of a man who sweeps within his arms the ventures of
twenty chapfallen companions.

But just as he had tried opium, so his thought now began to turn upon
gambling--not with appetite for its excitement, but with a sort of
wistful inward gaze after that easy way of getting money, which implied
no asking and brought no responsibility.  If he had been in London or
Paris at that time, it is probable that such thoughts, seconded by
opportunity, would have taken him into a gambling-house, no longer to
watch the gamblers, but to watch with them in kindred eagerness.
Repugnance would have been surmounted by the immense need to win, if
chance would be kind enough to let him.  An incident which happened not
very long after that airy notion of getting aid from his uncle had been
excluded, was a strong sign of the effect that might have followed any
extant opportunity of gambling.

The billiard-room at the Green Dragon was the constant resort of a
certain set, most of whom, like our acquaintance Mr. Bambridge, were
regarded as men of pleasure.  It was here that poor Fred Vincy had made
part of his memorable debt, having lost money in betting, and been
obliged to borrow of that gay companion.  It was generally known in
Middlemarch that a good deal of money was lost and won in this way; and
the consequent repute of the Green Dragon as a place of dissipation
naturally heightened in some quarters the temptation to go there.
Probably its regular visitants, like the initiates of freemasonry,
wished that there were something a little more tremendous to keep to
themselves concerning it; but they were not a closed community, and
many decent seniors as well as juniors occasionally turned into the
billiard-room to see what was going on.  Lydgate, who had the muscular
aptitude for billiards, and was fond of the game, had once or twice in
the early days after his arrival in Middlemarch taken his turn with the
cue at the Green Dragon; but afterwards he had no leisure for the game,
and no inclination for the socialities there.  One evening, however, he
had occasion to seek Mr. Bambridge at that resort.  The horsedealer had
engaged to get him a customer for his remaining good horse, for which
Lydgate had determined to substitute a cheap hack, hoping by this
reduction of style to get perhaps twenty pounds; and he cared now for
every small sum, as a help towards feeding the patience of his
tradesmen.  To run up to the billiard-room, as he was passing, would
save time.

Mr. Bambridge was not yet come, but would be sure to arrive by-and-by,
said his friend Mr. Horrock; and Lydgate stayed, playing a game for the
sake of passing the time.  That evening he had the peculiar light in
the eyes and the unusual vivacity which had been once noticed in him by
Mr. Farebrother.  The exceptional fact of his presence was much noticed
in the room, where there was a good deal of Middlemarch company; and
several lookers-on, as well as some of the players, were betting with
animation.  Lydgate was playing well, and felt confident; the bets were
dropping round him, and with a swift glancing thought of the probable
gain which might double the sum he was saving from his horse, he began
to bet on his own play, and won again and again.  Mr. Bambridge had
come in, but Lydgate did not notice him.  He was not only excited with
his play, but visions were gleaming on him of going the next day to
Brassing, where there was gambling on a grander scale to be had, and
where, by one powerful snatch at the devil's bait, he might carry it
off without the hook, and buy his rescue from his daily solicitings.

He was still winning when two new visitors entered.  One of them was a
young Hawley, just come from his law studies in town, and the other was
Fred Vincy, who had spent several evenings of late at this old haunt of
his.  Young Hawley, an accomplished billiard-player, brought a cool
fresh hand to the cue.  But Fred Vincy, startled at seeing Lydgate, and
astonished to see him betting with an excited air, stood aside, and
kept out of the circle round the table.

Fred had been rewarding resolution by a little laxity of late.  He had
been working heartily for six months at all outdoor occupations under
Mr. Garth, and by dint of severe practice had nearly mastered the
defects of his handwriting, this practice being, perhaps, a little the
less severe that it was often carried on in the evening at Mr. Garth's
under the eyes of Mary.  But the last fortnight Mary had been staying
at Lowick Parsonage with the ladies there, during Mr. Farebrother's
residence in Middlemarch, where he was carrying out some parochial
plans; and Fred, not seeing anything more agreeable to do, had turned
into the Green Dragon, partly to play at billiards, partly to taste the
old flavor of discourse about horses, sport, and things in general,
considered from a point of view which was not strenuously correct.  He
had not been out hunting once this season, had had no horse of his own
to ride, and had gone from place to place chiefly with Mr. Garth in his
gig, or on the sober cob which Mr. Garth could lend him.  It was a
little too bad, Fred began to think, that he should be kept in the
traces with more severity than if he had been a clergyman.  "I will
tell you what, Mistress Mary--it will be rather harder work to learn
surveying and drawing plans than it would have been to write sermons,"
he had said, wishing her to appreciate what he went through for her
sake; "and as to Hercules and Theseus, they were nothing to me.  They
had sport, and never learned to write a bookkeeping hand." And now,
Mary being out of the way for a little while, Fred, like any other
strong dog who cannot slip his collar, had pulled up the staple of his
chain and made a small escape, not of course meaning to go fast or far.
There could be no reason why he should not play at billiards, but he
was determined not to bet.  As to money just now, Fred had in his mind
the heroic project of saving almost all of the eighty pounds that Mr.
Garth offered him, and returning it, which he could easily do by giving
up all futile money-spending, since he had a superfluous stock of
clothes, and no expense in his board.  In that way he could, in one
year, go a good way towards repaying the ninety pounds of which he had
deprived Mrs. Garth, unhappily at a time when she needed that sum more
than she did now.  Nevertheless, it must be acknowledged that on this
evening, which was the fifth of his recent visits to the billiard-room,
Fred had, not in his pocket, but in his mind, the ten pounds which he
meant to reserve for himself from his half-year's salary (having before
him the pleasure of carrying thirty to Mrs. Garth when Mary was likely
to be come home again)--he had those ten pounds in his mind as a fund
from which he might risk something, if there were a chance of a good
bet.  Why?  Well, when sovereigns were flying about, why shouldn't he
catch a few?  He would never go far along that road again; but a man
likes to assure himself, and men of pleasure generally, what he could
do in the way of mischief if he chose, and that if he abstains from
making himself ill, or beggaring himself, or talking with the utmost
looseness which the narrow limits of human capacity will allow, it is
not because he is a spooney.  Fred did not enter into formal reasons,
which are a very artificial, inexact way of representing the tingling
returns of old habit, and the caprices of young blood: but there was
lurking in him a prophetic sense that evening, that when he began to
play he should also begin to bet--that he should enjoy some
punch-drinking, and in general prepare himself for feeling "rather
seedy" in the morning.  It is in such indefinable movements that action
often begins.

But the last thing likely to have entered Fred's expectation was that
he should see his brother-in-law Lydgate--of whom he had never quite
dropped the old opinion that he was a prig, and tremendously conscious
of his superiority--looking excited and betting, just as he himself
might have done.  Fred felt a shock greater than he could quite account
for by the vague knowledge that Lydgate was in debt, and that his
father had refused to help him; and his own inclination to enter into
the play was suddenly checked.  It was a strange reversal of attitudes:
Fred's blond face and blue eyes, usually bright and careless, ready to
give attention to anything that held out a promise of amusement,
looking involuntarily grave and almost embarrassed as if by the sight
of something unfitting; while Lydgate, who had habitually an air of
self-possessed strength, and a certain meditativeness that seemed to
lie behind his most observant attention, was acting, watching, speaking
with that excited narrow consciousness which reminds one of an animal
with fierce eyes and retractile claws.

Lydgate, by betting on his own strokes, had won sixteen pounds; but
young Hawley's arrival had changed the poise of things.  He made
first-rate strokes himself, and began to bet against Lydgate's strokes,
the strain of whose nerves was thus changed from simple confidence in
his own movements to defying another person's doubt in them.  The
defiance was more exciting than the confidence, but it was less sure.
He continued to bet on his own play, but began often to fail.  Still he
went on, for his mind was as utterly narrowed into that precipitous
crevice of play as if he had been the most ignorant lounger there.
Fred observed that Lydgate was losing fast, and found himself in the
new situation of puzzling his brains to think of some device by which,
without being offensive, he could withdraw Lydgate's attention, and
perhaps suggest to him a reason for quitting the room.  He saw that
others were observing Lydgate's strange unlikeness to himself, and it
occurred to him that merely to touch his elbow and call him aside for a
moment might rouse him from his absorption.  He could think of nothing
cleverer than the daring improbability of saying that he wanted to see
Rosy, and wished to know if she were at home this evening; and he was
going desperately to carry out this weak device, when a waiter came up
to him with a message, saying that Mr. Farebrother was below, and
begged to speak with him.

Fred was surprised, not quite comfortably, but sending word that he
would be down immediately, he went with a new impulse up to Lydgate,
said, "Can I speak to you a moment?" and drew him aside.

"Farebrother has just sent up a message to say that he wants to speak
to me.  He is below.  I thought you might like to know he was there, if
you had anything to say to him."

Fred had simply snatched up this pretext for speaking, because he could
not say, "You are losing confoundedly, and are making everybody stare
at you; you had better come away."  But inspiration could hardly have
served him better.  Lydgate had not before seen that Fred was present,
and his sudden appearance with an announcement of Mr. Farebrother had
the effect of a sharp concussion.

"No, no," said Lydgate; "I have nothing particular to say to him.
But--the game is up--I must be going--I came in just to see Bambridge."

"Bambridge is over there, but he is making a row--I don't think he's
ready for business.  Come down with me to Farebrother.  I expect he is
going to blow me up, and you will shield me," said Fred, with some
adroitness.

Lydgate felt shame, but could not bear to act as if he felt it, by
refusing to see Mr. Farebrother; and he went down.  They merely shook
hands, however, and spoke of the frost; and when all three had turned
into the street, the Vicar seemed quite willing to say good-by to
Lydgate.  His present purpose was clearly to talk with Fred alone, and
he said, kindly, "I disturbed you, young gentleman, because I have some
pressing business with you.  Walk with me to St. Botolph's, will you?"

It was a fine night, the sky thick with stars, and Mr. Farebrother
proposed that they should make a circuit to the old church by the
London road.  The next thing he said was--

"I thought Lydgate never went to the Green Dragon?"

"So did I," said Fred.  "But he said that he went to see Bambridge."

"He was not playing, then?"

Fred had not meant to tell this, but he was obliged now to say, "Yes,
he was.  But I suppose it was an accidental thing.  I have never seen
him there before."

"You have been going often yourself, then, lately?"

"Oh, about five or six times."

"I think you had some good reason for giving up the habit of going
there?"

"Yes.  You know all about it," said Fred, not liking to be catechised
in this way.  "I made a clean breast to you."

"I suppose that gives me a warrant to speak about the matter now.  It
is understood between us, is it not?--that we are on a footing of open
friendship: I have listened to you, and you will be willing to listen
to me.  I may take my turn in talking a little about myself?"

"I am under the deepest obligation to you, Mr. Farebrother," said Fred,
in a state of uncomfortable surmise.

"I will not affect to deny that you are under some obligation to me.
But I am going to confess to you, Fred, that I have been tempted to
reverse all that by keeping silence with you just now.  When somebody
said to me, 'Young Vincy has taken to being at the billiard-table every
night again--he won't bear the curb long;' I was tempted to do the
opposite of what I am doing--to hold my tongue and wait while you went
down the ladder again, betting first and then--"

"I have not made any bets," said Fred, hastily.

"Glad to hear it.  But I say, my prompting was to look on and see you
take the wrong turning, wear out Garth's patience, and lose the best
opportunity of your life--the opportunity which you made some rather
difficult effort to secure.  You can guess the feeling which raised
that temptation in me--I am sure you know it.  I am sure you know that
the satisfaction of your affections stands in the way of mine."

There was a pause.  Mr. Farebrother seemed to wait for a recognition of
the fact; and the emotion perceptible in the tones of his fine voice
gave solemnity to his words.  But no feeling could quell Fred's alarm.

"I could not be expected to give her up," he said, after a moment's
hesitation: it was not a case for any pretence of generosity.

"Clearly not, when her affection met yours.  But relations of this
sort, even when they are of long standing, are always liable to change.
I can easily conceive that you might act in a way to loosen the tie she
feels towards you--it must be remembered that she is only conditionally
bound to you--and that in that case, another man, who may flatter
himself that he has a hold on her regard, might succeed in winning that
firm place in her love as well as respect which you had let slip.  I
can easily conceive such a result," repeated Mr. Farebrother,
emphatically.  "There is a companionship of ready sympathy, which might
get the advantage even over the longest associations."  It seemed to
Fred that if Mr. Farebrother had had a beak and talons instead of his
very capable tongue, his mode of attack could hardly be more cruel.  He
had a horrible conviction that behind all this hypothetic statement
there was a knowledge of some actual change in Mary's feeling.

"Of course I know it might easily be all up with me," he said, in a
troubled voice.  "If she is beginning to compare--"  He broke off, not
liking to betray all he felt, and then said, by the help of a little
bitterness, "But I thought you were friendly to me."

"So I am; that is why we are here.  But I have had a strong disposition
to be otherwise.  I have said to myself, 'If there is a likelihood of
that youngster doing himself harm, why should you interfere?  Aren't
you worth as much as he is, and don't your sixteen years over and above
his, in which you have gone rather hungry, give you more right to
satisfaction than he has?  If there's a chance of his going to the
dogs, let him--perhaps you could nohow hinder it--and do you take the
benefit.'"

There was a pause, in which Fred was seized by a most uncomfortable
chill.  What was coming next?  He dreaded to hear that something had
been said to Mary--he felt as if he were listening to a threat rather
than a warning.  When the Vicar began again there was a change in his
tone like the encouraging transition to a major key.

"But I had once meant better than that, and I am come back to my old
intention.  I thought that I could hardly _secure myself_ in it better,
Fred, than by telling you just what had gone on in me.  And now, do you
understand me?  I want you to make the happiness of her life and your
own, and if there is any chance that a word of warning from me may turn
aside any risk to the contrary--well, I have uttered it."

There was a drop in the Vicar's voice when he spoke the last words. He
paused--they were standing on a patch of green where the road diverged
towards St. Botolph's, and he put out his hand, as if to imply that the
conversation was closed.  Fred was moved quite newly.  Some one highly
susceptible to the contemplation of a fine act has said, that it
produces a sort of regenerating shudder through the frame, and makes
one feel ready to begin a new life.  A good degree of that effect was
just then present in Fred Vincy.

"I will try to be worthy," he said, breaking off before he could say
"of you as well as of her."  And meanwhile Mr. Farebrother had gathered
the impulse to say something more.

"You must not imagine that I believe there is at present any decline in
her preference of you, Fred.  Set your heart at rest, that if you keep
right, other things will keep right."

"I shall never forget what you have done," Fred answered.  "I can't say
anything that seems worth saying--only I will try that your goodness
shall not be thrown away."

"That's enough.  Good-by, and God bless you."

In that way they parted.  But both of them walked about a long while
before they went out of the starlight.  Much of Fred's rumination might
be summed up in the words, "It certainly would have been a fine thing
for her to marry Farebrother--but if she loves me best and I am a good
husband?"

Perhaps Mr. Farebrother's might be concentrated into a single shrug and
one little speech.  "To think of the part one little woman can play in
the life of a man, so that to renounce her may be a very good imitation
of heroism, and to win her may be a discipline!"



CHAPTER LXVII.

    Now is there civil war within the soul:
    Resolve is thrust from off the sacred throne
    By clamorous Needs, and Pride the grand-vizier
    Makes humble compact, plays the supple part
    Of envoy and deft-tongued apologist
    For hungry rebels.


Happily Lydgate had ended by losing in the billiard-room, and brought
away no encouragement to make a raid on luck.  On the contrary, he felt
unmixed disgust with himself the next day when he had to pay four or
five pounds over and above his gains, and he carried about with him a
most unpleasant vision of the figure he had made, not only rubbing
elbows with the men at the Green Dragon but behaving just as they did.
A philosopher fallen to betting is hardly distinguishable from a
Philistine under the same circumstances: the difference will chiefly be
found in his subsequent reflections, and Lydgate chewed a very
disagreeable cud in that way.  His reason told him how the affair might
have been magnified into ruin by a slight change of scenery--if it had
been a gambling-house that he had turned into, where chance could be
clutched with both hands instead of being picked up with thumb and
fore-finger. Nevertheless, though reason strangled the desire to
gamble, there remained the feeling that, with an assurance of luck to
the needful amount, he would have liked to gamble, rather than take the
alternative which was beginning to urge itself as inevitable.

That alternative was to apply to Mr. Bulstrode.  Lydgate had so many
times boasted both to himself and others that he was totally
independent of Bulstrode, to whose plans he had lent himself solely
because they enabled him to carry out his own ideas of professional
work and public benefit--he had so constantly in their personal
intercourse had his pride sustained by the sense that he was making a
good social use of this predominating banker, whose opinions he thought
contemptible and whose motives often seemed to him an absurd mixture of
contradictory impressions--that he had been creating for himself
strong ideal obstacles to the proffering of any considerable request to
him on his own account.

Still, early in March his affairs were at that pass in which men begin
to say that their oaths were delivered in ignorance, and to perceive
that the act which they had called impossible to them is becoming
manifestly possible.  With Dover's ugly security soon to be put in
force, with the proceeds of his practice immediately absorbed in paying
back debts, and with the chance, if the worst were known, of daily
supplies being refused on credit, above all with the vision of
Rosamond's hopeless discontent continually haunting him, Lydgate had
begun to see that he should inevitably bend himself to ask help from
somebody or other.  At first he had considered whether he should write
to Mr. Vincy; but on questioning Rosamond he found that, as he had
suspected, she had already applied twice to her father, the last time
being since the disappointment from Sir Godwin; and papa had said that
Lydgate must look out for himself.  "Papa said he had come, with one
bad year after another, to trade more and more on borrowed capital, and
had had to give up many indulgences; he could not spare a single
hundred from the charges of his family.  He said, let Lydgate ask
Bulstrode: they have always been hand and glove."

Indeed, Lydgate himself had come to the conclusion that if he must end
by asking for a free loan, his relations with Bulstrode, more at least
than with any other man, might take the shape of a claim which was not
purely personal.  Bulstrode had indirectly helped to cause the failure
of his practice, and had also been highly gratified by getting a
medical partner in his plans:--but who among us ever reduced himself
to the sort of dependence in which Lydgate now stood, without trying to
believe that he had claims which diminished the humiliation of asking?
It was true that of late there had seemed to be a new languor of
interest in Bulstrode about the Hospital; but his health had got worse,
and showed signs of a deep-seated nervous affection.  In other respects
he did not appear to be changed: he had always been highly polite, but
Lydgate had observed in him from the first a marked coldness about his
marriage and other private circumstances, a coldness which he had
hitherto preferred to any warmth of familiarity between them.  He
deferred the intention from day to day, his habit of acting on his
conclusions being made infirm by his repugnance to every possible
conclusion and its consequent act.  He saw Mr. Bulstrode often, but he
did not try to use any occasion for his private purpose.  At one moment
he thought, "I will write a letter: I prefer that to any circuitous
talk;" at another he thought, "No; if I were talking to him, I could
make a retreat before any signs of disinclination."

Still the days passed and no letter was written, no special interview
sought.  In his shrinking from the humiliation of a dependent attitude
towards Bulstrode, he began to familiarize his imagination with another
step even more unlike his remembered self.  He began spontaneously to
consider whether it would be possible to carry out that puerile notion
of Rosamond's which had often made him angry, namely, that they should
quit Middlemarch without seeing anything beyond that preface.  The
question came--"Would any man buy the practice of me even now, for as
little as it is worth?  Then the sale might happen as a necessary
preparation for going away."

But against his taking this step, which he still felt to be a
contemptible relinquishment of present work, a guilty turning aside
from what was a real and might be a widening channel for worthy
activity, to start again without any justified destination, there was
this obstacle, that the purchaser, if procurable at all, might not be
quickly forthcoming.  And afterwards?  Rosamond in a poor lodging,
though in the largest city or most distant town, would not find the
life that could save her from gloom, and save him from the reproach of
having plunged her into it.  For when a man is at the foot of the hill
in his fortunes, he may stay a long while there in spite of
professional accomplishment.  In the British climate there is no
incompatibility between scientific insight and furnished lodgings: the
incompatibility is chiefly between scientific ambition and a wife who
objects to that kind of residence.

But in the midst of his hesitation, opportunity came to decide him.  A
note from Mr. Bulstrode requested Lydgate to call on him at the Bank.
A hypochondriacal tendency had shown itself in the banker's
constitution of late; and a lack of sleep, which was really only a
slight exaggeration of an habitual dyspeptic symptom, had been dwelt on
by him as a sign of threatening insanity.  He wanted to consult Lydgate
without delay on that particular morning, although he had nothing to
tell beyond what he had told before.  He listened eagerly to what
Lydgate had to say in dissipation of his fears, though this too was
only repetition; and this moment in which Bulstrode was receiving a
medical opinion with a sense of comfort, seemed to make the
communication of a personal need to him easier than it had been in
Lydgate's contemplation beforehand.  He had been insisting that it
would be well for Mr. Bulstrode to relax his attention to business.

"One sees how any mental strain, however slight, may affect a delicate
frame," said Lydgate at that stage of the consultation when the remarks
tend to pass from the personal to the general, "by the deep stamp which
anxiety will make for a time even on the young and vigorous.  I am
naturally very strong; yet I have been thoroughly shaken lately by an
accumulation of trouble."

"I presume that a constitution in the susceptible state in which mine
at present is, would be especially liable to fall a victim to cholera,
if it visited our district.  And since its appearance near London, we
may well besiege the Mercy-seat for our protection," said Mr.
Bulstrode, not intending to evade Lydgate's allusion, but really
preoccupied with alarms about himself.

"You have at all events taken your share in using good practical
precautions for the town, and that is the best mode of asking for
protection," said Lydgate, with a strong distaste for the broken
metaphor and bad logic of the banker's religion, somewhat increased by
the apparent deafness of his sympathy.  But his mind had taken up its
long-prepared movement towards getting help, and was not yet arrested.
He added, "The town has done well in the way of cleansing, and finding
appliances; and I think that if the cholera should come, even our
enemies will admit that the arrangements in the Hospital are a public
good."

"Truly," said Mr. Bulstrode, with some coldness.  "With regard to what
you say, Mr. Lydgate, about the relaxation of my mental labor, I have
for some time been entertaining a purpose to that effect--a purpose of
a very decided character.  I contemplate at least a temporary
withdrawal from the management of much business, whether benevolent or
commercial.  Also I think of changing my residence for a time: probably
I shall close or let 'The Shrubs,' and take some place near the
coast--under advice of course as to salubrity.  That would be a measure
which you would recommend?"

"Oh yes," said Lydgate, falling backward in his chair, with
ill-repressed impatience under the banker's pale earnest eyes and
intense preoccupation with himself.

"I have for some time felt that I should open this subject with you in
relation to our Hospital," continued Bulstrode.  "Under the
circumstances I have indicated, of course I must cease to have any
personal share in the management, and it is contrary to my views of
responsibility to continue a large application of means to an
institution which I cannot watch over and to some extent regulate.  I
shall therefore, in case of my ultimate decision to leave Middlemarch,
consider that I withdraw other support to the New Hospital than that
which will subsist in the fact that I chiefly supplied the expenses of
building it, and have contributed further large sums to its successful
working."

Lydgate's thought, when Bulstrode paused according to his wont, was,
"He has perhaps been losing a good deal of money." This was the most
plausible explanation of a speech which had caused rather a startling
change in his expectations.  He said in reply--

"The loss to the Hospital can hardly be made up, I fear."

"Hardly," returned Bulstrode, in the same deliberate, silvery tone;
"except by some changes of plan.  The only person who may be certainly
counted on as willing to increase her contributions is Mrs. Casaubon.
I have had an interview with her on the subject, and I have pointed out
to her, as I am about to do to you, that it will be desirable to win a
more general support to the New Hospital by a change of system."
Another pause, but Lydgate did not speak.

"The change I mean is an amalgamation with the Infirmary, so that the
New Hospital shall be regarded as a special addition to the elder
institution, having the same directing board.  It will be necessary,
also, that the medical management of the two shall be combined.  In
this way any difficulty as to the adequate maintenance of our new
establishment will be removed; the benevolent interests of the town
will cease to be divided."

Mr. Bulstrode had lowered his eyes from Lydgate's face to the buttons
of his coat as he again paused.

"No doubt that is a good device as to ways and means," said Lydgate,
with an edge of irony in his tone.  "But I can't be expected to rejoice
in it at once, since one of the first results will be that the other
medical men will upset or interrupt my methods, if it were only because
they are mine."

"I myself, as you know, Mr. Lydgate, highly valued the opportunity of
new and independent procedure which you have diligently employed: the
original plan, I confess, was one which I had much at heart, under
submission to the Divine Will.  But since providential indications
demand a renunciation from me, I renounce."

Bulstrode showed a rather exasperating ability in this conversation.
The broken metaphor and bad logic of motive which had stirred his
hearer's contempt were quite consistent with a mode of putting the
facts which made it difficult for Lydgate to vent his own indignation
and disappointment.  After some rapid reflection, he only asked--

"What did Mrs. Casaubon say?"

"That was the further statement which I wished to make to you," said
Bulstrode, who had thoroughly prepared his ministerial explanation.
"She is, you are aware, a woman of most munificent disposition, and
happily in possession--not I presume of great wealth, but of funds
which she can well spare.  She has informed me that though she has
destined the chief part of those funds to another purpose, she is
willing to consider whether she cannot fully take my place in relation
to the Hospital.  But she wishes for ample time to mature her thoughts
on the subject, and I have told her that there is no need for
haste--that, in fact, my own plans are not yet absolute."

Lydgate was ready to say, "If Mrs. Casaubon would take your place,
there would be gain, instead of loss."  But there was still a weight on
his mind which arrested this cheerful candor.  He replied, "I suppose,
then, that I may enter into the subject with Mrs. Casaubon."

"Precisely; that is what she expressly desires.  Her decision, she
says, will much depend on what you can tell her.  But not at present:
she is, I believe, just setting out on a journey.  I have her letter
here," said Mr. Bulstrode, drawing it out, and reading from it.  "'I am
immediately otherwise engaged,' she says.  'I am going into Yorkshire
with Sir James and Lady Chettam; and the conclusions I come to about
some land which I am to see there may affect my power of contributing
to the Hospital.'  Thus, Mr. Lydgate, there is no haste necessary in
this matter; but I wished to apprise you beforehand of what may
possibly occur."

Mr. Bulstrode returned the letter to his side-pocket, and changed his
attitude as if his business were closed.  Lydgate, whose renewed hope
about the Hospital only made him more conscious of the facts which
poisoned his hope, felt that his effort after help, if made at all,
must be made now and vigorously.

"I am much obliged to you for giving me full notice," he said, with a
firm intention in his tone, yet with an interruptedness in his delivery
which showed that he spoke unwillingly.  "The highest object to me is
my profession, and I had identified the Hospital with the best use I
can at present make of my profession.  But the best use is not always
the same with monetary success.  Everything which has made the Hospital
unpopular has helped with other causes--I think they are all connected
with my professional zeal--to make me unpopular as a practitioner.  I
get chiefly patients who can't pay me.  I should like them best, if I
had nobody to pay on my own side." Lydgate waited a little, but
Bulstrode only bowed, looking at him fixedly, and he went on with the
same interrupted enunciation--as if he were biting an objectional leek.

"I have slipped into money difficulties which I can see no way out of,
unless some one who trusts me and my future will advance me a sum
without other security.  I had very little fortune left when I came
here.  I have no prospects of money from my own family.  My expenses,
in consequence of my marriage, have been very much greater than I had
expected.  The result at this moment is that it would take a thousand
pounds to clear me.  I mean, to free me from the risk of having all my
goods sold in security of my largest debt--as well as to pay my other
debts--and leave anything to keep us a little beforehand with our small
income.  I find that it is out of the question that my wife's father
should make such an advance.  That is why I mention my position to--to
the only other man who may be held to have some personal connection
with my prosperity or ruin."

Lydgate hated to hear himself.  But he had spoken now, and had spoken
with unmistakable directness.  Mr. Bulstrode replied without haste, but
also without hesitation.

"I am grieved, though, I confess, not surprised by this information,
Mr. Lydgate.  For my own part, I regretted your alliance with my
brother-in-law's family, which has always been of prodigal habits, and
which has already been much indebted to me for sustainment in its
present position.  My advice to you, Mr. Lydgate, would be, that
instead of involving yourself in further obligations, and continuing a
doubtful struggle, you should simply become a bankrupt."

"That would not improve my prospect," said Lydgate, rising and speaking
bitterly, "even if it were a more agreeable thing in itself."

"It is always a trial," said Mr. Bulstrode; "but trial, my dear sir, is
our portion here, and is a needed corrective.  I recommend you to weigh
the advice I have given."

"Thank you," said Lydgate, not quite knowing what he said.  "I have
occupied you too long.  Good-day."



CHAPTER LXVIII.

    "What suit of grace hath Virtue to put on
     If Vice shall wear as good, and do as well?
     If Wrong, if Craft, if Indiscretion
     Act as fair parts with ends as laudable?
     Which all this mighty volume of events
     The world, the universal map of deeds,
     Strongly controls, and proves from all descents,
     That the directest course still best succeeds.
     For should not grave and learn'd Experience
     That looks with the eyes of all the world beside,
     And with all ages holds intelligence,
     Go safer than Deceit without a guide!
                                --DANIEL: Musophilus.


That change of plan and shifting of interest which Bulstrode stated or
betrayed in his conversation with Lydgate, had been determined in him
by some severe experience which he had gone through since the epoch of
Mr. Larcher's sale, when Raffles had recognized Will Ladislaw, and when
the banker had in vain attempted an act of restitution which might move
Divine Providence to arrest painful consequences.

His certainty that Raffles, unless he were dead, would return to
Middlemarch before long, had been justified.  On Christmas Eve he had
reappeared at The Shrubs.  Bulstrode was at home to receive him, and
hinder his communication with the rest of the family, but he could not
altogether hinder the circumstances of the visit from compromising
himself and alarming his wife.  Raffles proved more unmanageable than
he had shown himself to be in his former appearances, his chronic state
of mental restlessness, the growing effect of habitual intemperance,
quickly shaking off every impression from what was said to him.  He
insisted on staying in the house, and Bulstrode, weighing two sets of
evils, felt that this was at least not a worse alternative than his
going into the town.  He kept him in his own room for the evening and
saw him to bed, Raffles all the while amusing himself with the
annoyance he was causing this decent and highly prosperous
fellow-sinner, an amusement which he facetiously expressed as sympathy
with his friend's pleasure in entertaining a man who had been
serviceable to him, and who had not had all his earnings.  There was a
cunning calculation under this noisy joking--a cool resolve to extract
something the handsomer from Bulstrode as payment for release from this
new application of torture.  But his cunning had a little overcast its
mark.

Bulstrode was indeed more tortured than the coarse fibre of Raffles
could enable him to imagine.  He had told his wife that he was simply
taking care of this wretched creature, the victim of vice, who might
otherwise injure himself; he implied, without the direct form of
falsehood, that there was a family tie which bound him to this care,
and that there were signs of mental alienation in Raffles which urged
caution.  He would himself drive the unfortunate being away the next
morning.  In these hints he felt that he was supplying Mrs. Bulstrode
with precautionary information for his daughters and servants, and
accounting for his allowing no one but himself to enter the room even
with food and drink.  But he sat in an agony of fear lest Raffles
should be overheard in his loud and plain references to past facts--lest
Mrs. Bulstrode should be even tempted to listen at the door.  How
could he hinder her, how betray his terror by opening the door to
detect her?  She was a woman of honest direct habits, and little likely
to take so low a course in order to arrive at painful knowledge; but
fear was stronger than the calculation of probabilities.

In this way Raffles had pushed the torture too far, and produced an
effect which had not been in his plan.  By showing himself hopelessly
unmanageable he had made Bulstrode feel that a strong defiance was the
only resource left.  After taking Raffles to bed that night the banker
ordered his closed carriage to be ready at half-past seven the next
morning.  At six o'clock he had already been long dressed, and had
spent some of his wretchedness in prayer, pleading his motives for
averting the worst evil if in anything he had used falsity and spoken
what was not true before God.  For Bulstrode shrank from a direct lie
with an intensity disproportionate to the number of his more indirect
misdeeds.  But many of these misdeeds were like the subtle muscular
movements which are not taken account of in the consciousness, though
they bring about the end that we fix our mind on and desire.  And it is
only what we are vividly conscious of that we can vividly imagine to be
seen by Omniscience.

Bulstrode carried his candle to the bedside of Raffles, who was
apparently in a painful dream.  He stood silent, hoping that the
presence of the light would serve to waken the sleeper gradually and
gently, for he feared some noise as the consequence of a too sudden
awakening.  He had watched for a couple of minutes or more the
shudderings and pantings which seemed likely to end in waking, when
Raffles, with a long half-stifled moan, started up and stared round him
in terror, trembling and gasping.  But he made no further noise, and
Bulstrode, setting down the candle, awaited his recovery.

It was a quarter of an hour later before Bulstrode, with a cold
peremptoriness of manner which he had not before shown, said, "I came
to call you thus early, Mr. Raffles, because I have ordered the
carriage to be ready at half-past seven, and intend myself to conduct
you as far as Ilsely, where you can either take the railway or await a
coach." Raffles was about to speak, but Bulstrode anticipated him
imperiously with the words, "Be silent, sir, and hear what I have to
say.  I shall supply you with money now, and I will furnish you with a
reasonable sum from time to time, on your application to me by letter;
but if you choose to present yourself here again, if you return to
Middlemarch, if you use your tongue in a manner injurious to me, you
will have to live on such fruits as your malice can bring you, without
help from me.  Nobody will pay you well for blasting my name: I know
the worst you can do against me, and I shall brave it if you dare to
thrust yourself upon me again.  Get up, sir, and do as I order you,
without noise, or I will send for a policeman to take you off my
premises, and you may carry your stories into every pothouse in the
town, but you shall have no sixpence from me to pay your expenses
there."

Bulstrode had rarely in his life spoken with such nervous energy: he
had been deliberating on this speech and its probable effects through a
large part of the night; and though he did not trust to its ultimately
saving him from any return of Raffles, he had concluded that it was the
best throw he could make.  It succeeded in enforcing submission from
the jaded man this morning: his empoisoned system at this moment
quailed before Bulstrode's cold, resolute bearing, and he was taken off
quietly in the carriage before the family breakfast time.  The servants
imagined him to be a poor relation, and were not surprised that a
strict man like their master, who held his head high in the world,
should be ashamed of such a cousin and want to get rid of him.  The
banker's drive of ten miles with his hated companion was a dreary
beginning of the Christmas day; but at the end of the drive, Raffles
had recovered his spirits, and parted in a contentment for which there
was the good reason that the banker had given him a hundred pounds.
Various motives urged Bulstrode to this open-handedness, but he did not
himself inquire closely into all of them.  As he had stood watching
Raffles in his uneasy sleep, it had certainly entered his mind that the
man had been much shattered since the first gift of two hundred pounds.

He had taken care to repeat the incisive statement of his resolve not
to be played on any more; and had tried to penetrate Raffles with the
fact that he had shown the risks of bribing him to be quite equal to
the risks of defying him.  But when, freed from his repulsive presence,
Bulstrode returned to his quiet home, he brought with him no confidence
that he had secured more than a respite.  It was as if he had had a
loathsome dream, and could not shake off its images with their hateful
kindred of sensations--as if on all the pleasant surroundings of his
life a dangerous reptile had left his slimy traces.

Who can know how much of his most inward life is made up of the
thoughts he believes other men to have about him, until that fabric of
opinion is threatened with ruin?

Bulstrode was only the more conscious that there was a deposit of
uneasy presentiment in his wife's mind, because she carefully avoided
any allusion to it.  He had been used every day to taste the flavor of
supremacy and the tribute of complete deference: and the certainty that
he was watched or measured with a hidden suspicion of his having some
discreditable secret, made his voice totter when he was speaking to
edification.  Foreseeing, to men of Bulstrode's anxious temperament, is
often worse than seeing; and his imagination continually heightened the
anguish of an imminent disgrace.  Yes, imminent; for if his defiance of
Raffles did not keep the man away--and though he prayed for this result
he hardly hoped for it--the disgrace was certain.  In vain he said to
himself that, if permitted, it would be a divine visitation, a
chastisement, a preparation; he recoiled from the imagined burning; and
he judged that it must be more for the Divine glory that he should
escape dishonor.  That recoil had at last urged him to make
preparations for quitting Middlemarch.  If evil truth must be reported
of him, he would then be at a less scorching distance from the contempt
of his old neighbors; and in a new scene, where his life would not have
gathered the same wide sensibility, the tormentor, if he pursued him,
would be less formidable.  To leave the place finally would, he knew,
be extremely painful to his wife, and on other grounds he would have
preferred to stay where he had struck root.  Hence he made his
preparations at first in a conditional way, wishing to leave on all
sides an opening for his return after brief absence, if any favorable
intervention of Providence should dissipate his fears.  He was
preparing to transfer his management of the Bank, and to give up any
active control of other commercial affairs in the neighborhood, on the
ground of his failing health, but without excluding his future
resumption of such work.  The measure would cause him some added
expense and some diminution of income beyond what he had already
undergone from the general depression of trade; and the Hospital
presented itself as a principal object of outlay on which he could
fairly economize.

This was the experience which had determined his conversation with
Lydgate.  But at this time his arrangements had most of them gone no
farther than a stage at which he could recall them if they proved to be
unnecessary.  He continually deferred the final steps; in the midst of
his fears, like many a man who is in danger of shipwreck or of being
dashed from his carriage by runaway horses, he had a clinging
impression that something would happen to hinder the worst, and that to
spoil his life by a late transplantation might be over-hasty--especially
since it was difficult to account satisfactorily to his wife for the
project of their indefinite exile from the only place where she would
like to live.

Among the affairs Bulstrode had to care for, was the management of the
farm at Stone Court in case of his absence; and on this as well as on
all other matters connected with any houses and land he possessed in or
about Middlemarch, he had consulted Caleb Garth.  Like every one else
who had business of that sort, he wanted to get the agent who was more
anxious for his employer's interests than his own.  With regard to
Stone Court, since Bulstrode wished to retain his hold on the stock,
and to have an arrangement by which he himself could, if he chose,
resume his favorite recreation of superintendence, Caleb had advised
him not to trust to a mere bailiff, but to let the land, stock, and
implements yearly, and take a proportionate share of the proceeds.

"May I trust to you to find me a tenant on these terms, Mr. Garth?"
said Bulstrode.  "And will you mention to me the yearly sum which would
repay you for managing these affairs which we have discussed together?"

"I'll think about it," said Caleb, in his blunt way.  "I'll see how I
can make it out."

If it had not been that he had to consider Fred Vincy's future, Mr.
Garth would not probably have been glad of any addition to his work, of
which his wife was always fearing an excess for him as he grew older.
But on quitting Bulstrode after that conversation, a very alluring idea
occurred to him about this said letting of Stone Court.  What if
Bulstrode would agree to his placing Fred Vincy there on the
understanding that he, Caleb Garth, should be responsible for the
management?  It would be an excellent schooling for Fred; he might make
a modest income there, and still have time left to get knowledge by
helping in other business.  He mentioned his notion to Mrs. Garth with
such evident delight that she could not bear to chill his pleasure by
expressing her constant fear of his undertaking too much.

"The lad would be as happy as two," he said, throwing himself back in
his chair, and looking radiant, "if I could tell him it was all
settled.  Think; Susan!  His mind had been running on that place for
years before old Featherstone died.  And it would be as pretty a turn
of things as could be that he should hold the place in a good
industrious way after all--by his taking to business.  For it's likely
enough Bulstrode might let him go on, and gradually buy the stock.  He
hasn't made up his mind, I can see, whether or not he shall settle
somewhere else as a lasting thing.  I never was better pleased with a
notion in my life.  And then the children might be married by-and-by,
Susan."

"You will not give any hint of the plan to Fred, until you are sure
that Bulstrode would agree to the plan?" said Mrs. Garth, in a tone of
gentle caution.  "And as to marriage, Caleb, we old people need not
help to hasten it."

"Oh, I don't know," said Caleb, swinging his head aside.  "Marriage is
a taming thing.  Fred would want less of my bit and bridle.  However, I
shall say nothing till I know the ground I'm treading on.  I shall
speak to Bulstrode again."

He took his earliest opportunity of doing so.  Bulstrode had anything
but a warm interest in his nephew Fred Vincy, but he had a strong wish
to secure Mr. Garth's services on many scattered points of business at
which he was sure to be a considerable loser, if they were under less
conscientious management.  On that ground he made no objection to Mr.
Garth's proposal; and there was also another reason why he was not
sorry to give a consent which was to benefit one of the Vincy family.
It was that Mrs. Bulstrode, having heard of Lydgate's debts, had been
anxious to know whether her husband could not do something for poor
Rosamond, and had been much troubled on learning from him that
Lydgate's affairs were not easily remediable, and that the wisest plan
was to let them "take their course." Mrs. Bulstrode had then said for
the first time, "I think you are always a little hard towards my
family, Nicholas.  And I am sure I have no reason to deny any of my
relatives.  Too worldly they may be, but no one ever had to say that
they were not respectable."

"My dear Harriet," said Mr. Bulstrode, wincing under his wife's eyes,
which were filling with tears, "I have supplied your brother with a
great deal of capital.  I cannot be expected to take care of his
married children."

That seemed to be true, and Mrs. Bulstrode's remonstrance subsided into
pity for poor Rosamond, whose extravagant education she had always
foreseen the fruits of.

But remembering that dialogue, Mr. Bulstrode felt that when he had to
talk to his wife fully about his plan of quitting Middlemarch, he
should be glad to tell her that he had made an arrangement which might
be for the good of her nephew Fred.  At present he had merely mentioned
to her that he thought of shutting up The Shrubs for a few months, and
taking a house on the Southern Coast.

Hence Mr. Garth got the assurance he desired, namely, that in case of
Bulstrode's departure from Middlemarch for an indefinite time, Fred
Vincy should be allowed to have the tenancy of Stone Court on the terms
proposed.

Caleb was so elated with his hope of this "neat turn" being given to
things, that if his self-control had not been braced by a little
affectionate wifely scolding, he would have betrayed everything to
Mary, wanting "to give the child comfort."  However, he restrained
himself, and kept in strict privacy from Fred certain visits which he
was making to Stone Court, in order to look more thoroughly into the
state of the land and stock, and take a preliminary estimate.  He was
certainly more eager in these visits than the probable speed of events
required him to be; but he was stimulated by a fatherly delight in
occupying his mind with this bit of probable happiness which he held in
store like a hidden birthday gift for Fred and Mary.

"But suppose the whole scheme should turn out to be a castle in the
air?" said Mrs. Garth.

"Well, well," replied Caleb; "the castle will tumble about nobody's
head."



CHAPTER LXIX.

    "If thou hast heard a word, let it die with thee."
                                       --Ecclesiasticus.


Mr. Bulstrode was still seated in his manager's room at the Bank, about
three o'clock of the same day on which he had received Lydgate there,
when the clerk entered to say that his horse was waiting, and also that
Mr. Garth was outside and begged to speak with him.

"By all means," said Bulstrode; and Caleb entered.  "Pray sit down, Mr.
Garth," continued the banker, in his suavest tone.

"I am glad that you arrived just in time to find me here.  I know you
count your minutes."

"Oh," said Caleb, gently, with a slow swing of his head on one side, as
he seated himself and laid his hat on the floor.

He looked at the ground, leaning forward and letting his long fingers
droop between his legs, while each finger moved in succession, as if it
were sharing some thought which filled his large quiet brow.

Mr. Bulstrode, like every one else who knew Caleb, was used to his
slowness in beginning to speak on any topic which he felt to be
important, and rather expected that he was about to recur to the buying
of some houses in Blindman's Court, for the sake of pulling them down,
as a sacrifice of property which would be well repaid by the influx of
air and light on that spot.  It was by propositions of this kind that
Caleb was sometimes troublesome to his employers; but he had usually
found Bulstrode ready to meet him in projects of improvement, and they
had got on well together.  When he spoke again, however, it was to say,
in rather a subdued voice--

"I have just come away from Stone Court, Mr. Bulstrode."

"You found nothing wrong there, I hope," said the banker; "I was there
myself yesterday.  Abel has done well with the lambs this year."

"Why, yes," said Caleb, looking up gravely, "there is something wrong--a
stranger, who is very ill, I think.  He wants a doctor, and I came to
tell you of that.  His name is Raffles."

He saw the shock of his words passing through Bulstrode's frame.  On
this subject the banker had thought that his fears were too constantly
on the watch to be taken by surprise; but he had been mistaken.

"Poor wretch!" he said in a compassionate tone, though his lips
trembled a little.  "Do you know how he came there?"

"I took him myself," said Caleb, quietly--"took him up in my gig.  He
had got down from the coach, and was walking a little beyond the
turning from the toll-house, and I overtook him.  He remembered seeing
me with you once before, at Stone Court, and he asked me to take him
on.  I saw he was ill: it seemed to me the right thing to do, to carry
him under shelter.  And now I think you should lose no time in getting
advice for him." Caleb took up his hat from the floor as he ended, and
rose slowly from his seat.

"Certainly," said Bulstrode, whose mind was very active at this moment.
"Perhaps you will yourself oblige me, Mr. Garth, by calling at Mr.
Lydgate's as you pass--or stay! he may at this hour probably be at the
Hospital.  I will first send my man on the horse there with a note this
instant, and then I will myself ride to Stone Court."

Bulstrode quickly wrote a note, and went out himself to give the
commission to his man.  When he returned, Caleb was standing as before
with one hand on the back of the chair, holding his hat with the other.
In Bulstrode's mind the dominant thought was, "Perhaps Raffles only
spoke to Garth of his illness.  Garth may wonder, as he must have done
before, at this disreputable fellow's claiming intimacy with me; but he
will know nothing.  And he is friendly to me--I can be of use to him."

He longed for some confirmation of this hopeful conjecture, but to have
asked any question as to what Raffles had said or done would have been
to betray fear.

"I am exceedingly obliged to you, Mr. Garth," he said, in his usual
tone of politeness.  "My servant will be back in a few minutes, and I
shall then go myself to see what can be done for this unfortunate man.
Perhaps you had some other business with me?  If so, pray be seated."

"Thank you," said Caleb, making a slight gesture with his right hand to
waive the invitation.  "I wish to say, Mr. Bulstrode, that I must
request you to put your business into some other hands than mine.  I am
obliged to you for your handsome way of meeting me--about the letting
of Stone Court, and all other business.  But I must give it up."  A
sharp certainty entered like a stab into Bulstrode's soul.

"This is sudden, Mr. Garth," was all he could say at first.

"It is," said Caleb; "but it is quite fixed.  I must give it up."

He spoke with a firmness which was very gentle, and yet he could see
that Bulstrode seemed to cower under that gentleness, his face looking
dried and his eyes swerving away from the glance which rested on him.
Caleb felt a deep pity for him, but he could have used no pretexts to
account for his resolve, even if they would have been of any use.

"You have been led to this, I apprehend, by some slanders concerning me
uttered by that unhappy creature," said Bulstrode, anxious now to know
the utmost.

"That is true.  I can't deny that I act upon what I heard from him."

"You are a conscientious man, Mr. Garth--a man, I trust, who feels
himself accountable to God.  You would not wish to injure me by being
too ready to believe a slander," said Bulstrode, casting about for
pleas that might be adapted to his hearer's mind.  "That is a poor
reason for giving up a connection which I think I may say will be
mutually beneficial."

"I would injure no man if I could help it," said Caleb; "even if I
thought God winked at it.  I hope I should have a feeling for my
fellow-creature. But, sir--I am obliged to believe that this Raffles
has told me the truth.  And I can't be happy in working with you, or
profiting by you.  It hurts my mind.  I must beg you to seek another
agent."

"Very well, Mr. Garth.  But I must at least claim to know the worst
that he has told you.  I must know what is the foul speech that I am
liable to be the victim of," said Bulstrode, a certain amount of anger
beginning to mingle with his humiliation before this quiet man who
renounced his benefits.

"That's needless," said Caleb, waving his hand, bowing his head
slightly, and not swerving from the tone which had in it the merciful
intention to spare this pitiable man.  "What he has said to me will
never pass from my lips, unless something now unknown forces it from
me.  If you led a harmful life for gain, and kept others out of their
rights by deceit, to get the more for yourself, I dare say you
repent--you would like to go back, and can't: that must be a bitter
thing"--Caleb paused a moment and shook his head--"it is not for me to
make your life harder to you."

"But you do--you do make it harder to me," said Bulstrode constrained
into a genuine, pleading cry.  "You make it harder to me by turning
your back on me."

"That I'm forced to do," said Caleb, still more gently, lifting up his
hand.  "I am sorry.  I don't judge you and say, he is wicked, and I am
righteous.  God forbid.  I don't know everything.  A man may do wrong,
and his will may rise clear out of it, though he can't get his life
clear.  That's a bad punishment.  If it is so with you,--well, I'm
very sorry for you.  But I have that feeling inside me, that I can't go
on working with you.  That's all, Mr. Bulstrode.  Everything else is
buried, so far as my will goes.  And I wish you good-day."

"One moment, Mr. Garth!" said Bulstrode, hurriedly.  "I may trust then
to your solemn assurance that you will not repeat either to man or
woman what--even if it have any degree of truth in it--is yet a
malicious representation?"  Caleb's wrath was stirred, and he said,
indignantly--

"Why should I have said it if I didn't mean it?  I am in no fear of
you.  Such tales as that will never tempt my tongue."

"Excuse me--I am agitated--I am the victim of this abandoned man."

"Stop a bit! you have got to consider whether you didn't help to make
him worse, when you profited by his vices."

"You are wronging me by too readily believing him," said Bulstrode,
oppressed, as by a nightmare, with the inability to deny flatly what
Raffles might have said; and yet feeling it an escape that Caleb had
not so stated it to him as to ask for that flat denial.

"No," said Caleb, lifting his hand deprecatingly; "I am ready to
believe better, when better is proved.  I rob you of no good chance.
As to speaking, I hold it a crime to expose a man's sin unless I'm
clear it must be done to save the innocent.  That is my way of
thinking, Mr. Bulstrode, and what I say, I've no need to swear.  I wish
you good-day."

Some hours later, when he was at home, Caleb said to his wife,
incidentally, that he had had some little differences with Bulstrode,
and that in consequence, he had given up all notion of taking Stone
Court, and indeed had resigned doing further business for him.

"He was disposed to interfere too much, was he?" said Mrs. Garth,
imagining that her husband had been touched on his sensitive point, and
not been allowed to do what he thought right as to materials and modes
of work.

"Oh," said Caleb, bowing his head and waving his hand gravely.  And
Mrs. Garth knew that this was a sign of his not intending to speak
further on the subject.

As for Bulstrode, he had almost immediately mounted his horse and set
off for Stone Court, being anxious to arrive there before Lydgate.

His mind was crowded with images and conjectures, which were a language
to his hopes and fears, just as we hear tones from the vibrations which
shake our whole system.  The deep humiliation with which he had winced
under Caleb Garth's knowledge of his past and rejection of his
patronage, alternated with and almost gave way to the sense of safety
in the fact that Garth, and no other, had been the man to whom Raffles
had spoken.  It seemed to him a sort of earnest that Providence
intended his rescue from worse consequences; the way being thus left
open for the hope of secrecy.  That Raffles should be afflicted with
illness, that he should have been led to Stone Court rather than
elsewhere--Bulstrode's heart fluttered at the vision of probabilities
which these events conjured up.  If it should turn out that he was
freed from all danger of disgrace--if he could breathe in perfect
liberty--his life should be more consecrated than it had ever been
before.  He mentally lifted up this vow as if it would urge the result
he longed for--he tried to believe in the potency of that prayerful
resolution--its potency to determine death.  He knew that he ought to
say, "Thy will be done;" and he said it often.  But the intense desire
remained that the will of God might be the death of that hated man.

Yet when he arrived at Stone Court he could not see the change in
Raffles without a shock.  But for his pallor and feebleness, Bulstrode
would have called the change in him entirely mental.  Instead of his
loud tormenting mood, he showed an intense, vague terror, and seemed to
deprecate Bulstrode's anger, because the money was all gone--he had
been robbed--it had half of it been taken from him.  He had only come
here because he was ill and somebody was hunting him--somebody was
after him, he had told nobody anything, he had kept his mouth shut.
Bulstrode, not knowing the significance of these symptoms, interpreted
this new nervous susceptibility into a means of alarming Raffles into
true confessions, and taxed him with falsehood in saying that he had
not told anything, since he had just told the man who took him up in
his gig and brought him to Stone Court.  Raffles denied this with
solemn adjurations; the fact being that the links of consciousness were
interrupted in him, and that his minute terror-stricken narrative to
Caleb Garth had been delivered under a set of visionary impulses which
had dropped back into darkness.

Bulstrode's heart sank again at this sign that he could get no grasp
over the wretched man's mind, and that no word of Raffles could be
trusted as to the fact which he most wanted to know, namely, whether or
not he had really kept silence to every one in the neighborhood except
Caleb Garth.  The housekeeper had told him without the least constraint
of manner that since Mr. Garth left, Raffles had asked her for beer,
and after that had not spoken, seeming very ill.  On that side it might
be concluded that there had been no betrayal.  Mrs. Abel thought, like
the servants at The Shrubs, that the strange man belonged to the
unpleasant "kin" who are among the troubles of the rich; she had at
first referred the kinship to Mr. Rigg, and where there was property
left, the buzzing presence of such large blue-bottles seemed natural
enough.  How he could be "kin" to Bulstrode as well was not so clear,
but Mrs. Abel agreed with her husband that there was "no knowing," a
proposition which had a great deal of mental food for her, so that she
shook her head over it without further speculation.

In less than an hour Lydgate arrived.  Bulstrode met him outside the
wainscoted parlor, where Raffles was, and said--

"I have called you in, Mr. Lydgate, to an unfortunate man who was once
in my employment, many years ago.  Afterwards he went to America, and
returned I fear to an idle dissolute life.  Being destitute, he has a
claim on me.  He was slightly connected with Rigg, the former owner of
this place, and in consequence found his way here.  I believe he is
seriously ill: apparently his mind is affected.  I feel bound to do the
utmost for him."

Lydgate, who had the remembrance of his last conversation with
Bulstrode strongly upon him, was not disposed to say an unnecessary
word to him, and bowed slightly in answer to this account; but just
before entering the room he turned automatically and said, "What is his
name?"--to know names being as much a part of the medical man's
accomplishment as of the practical politician's.

"Raffles, John Raffles," said Bulstrode, who hoped that whatever became
of Raffles, Lydgate would never know any more of him.

When he had thoroughly examined and considered the patient, Lydgate
ordered that he should go to bed, and be kept there in as complete
quiet as possible, and then went with Bulstrode into another room.

"It is a serious case, I apprehend," said the banker, before Lydgate
began to speak.

"No--and yes," said Lydgate, half dubiously.  "It is difficult to
decide as to the possible effect of long-standing complications; but
the man had a robust constitution to begin with.  I should not expect
this attack to be fatal, though of course the system is in a ticklish
state.  He should be well watched and attended to."

"I will remain here myself," said Bulstrode.  "Mrs. Abel and her
husband are inexperienced.  I can easily remain here for the night, if
you will oblige me by taking a note for Mrs. Bulstrode."

"I should think that is hardly necessary," said Lydgate.  "He seems
tame and terrified enough.  He might become more unmanageable.  But
there is a man here--is there not?"

"I have more than once stayed here a few nights for the sake of
seclusion," said Bulstrode, indifferently; "I am quite disposed to do
so now.  Mrs. Abel and her husband can relieve or aid me, if necessary."

"Very well.  Then I need give my directions only to you," said Lydgate,
not feeling surprised at a little peculiarity in Bulstrode.

"You think, then, that the case is hopeful?" said Bulstrode, when
Lydgate had ended giving his orders.

"Unless there turn out to be further complications, such as I have not
at present detected--yes," said Lydgate.  "He may pass on to a worse
stage; but I should not wonder if he got better in a few days, by
adhering to the treatment I have prescribed.  There must be firmness.
Remember, if he calls for liquors of any sort, not to give them to him.
In my opinion, men in his condition are oftener killed by treatment
than by the disease.  Still, new symptoms may arise.  I shall come
again to-morrow morning."

After waiting for the note to be carried to Mrs. Bulstrode, Lydgate
rode away, forming no conjectures, in the first instance, about the
history of Raffles, but rehearsing the whole argument, which had lately
been much stirred by the publication of Dr. Ware's abundant experience
in America, as to the right way of treating cases of alcoholic
poisoning such as this.  Lydgate, when abroad, had already been
interested in this question: he was strongly convinced against the
prevalent practice of allowing alcohol and persistently administering
large doses of opium; and he had repeatedly acted on this conviction
with a favorable result.

"The man is in a diseased state," he thought, "but there's a good deal
of wear in him still.  I suppose he is an object of charity to
Bulstrode.  It is curious what patches of hardness and tenderness lie
side by side in men's dispositions.  Bulstrode seems the most
unsympathetic fellow I ever saw about some people, and yet he has taken
no end of trouble, and spent a great deal of money, on benevolent
objects.  I suppose he has some test by which he finds out whom Heaven
cares for--he has made up his mind that it doesn't care for me."

This streak of bitterness came from a plenteous source, and kept
widening in the current of his thought as he neared Lowick Gate.  He
had not been there since his first interview with Bulstrode in the
morning, having been found at the Hospital by the banker's messenger;
and for the first time he was returning to his home without the vision
of any expedient in the background which left him a hope of raising
money enough to deliver him from the coming destitution of everything
which made his married life tolerable--everything which saved him and
Rosamond from that bare isolation in which they would be forced to
recognize how little of a comfort they could be to each other.  It was
more bearable to do without tenderness for himself than to see that his
own tenderness could make no amends for the lack of other things to
her.  The sufferings of his own pride from humiliations past and to
come were keen enough, yet they were hardly distinguishable to himself
from that more acute pain which dominated them--the pain of foreseeing
that Rosamond would come to regard him chiefly as the cause of
disappointment and unhappiness to her.  He had never liked the
makeshifts of poverty, and they had never before entered into his
prospects for himself; but he was beginning now to imagine how two
creatures who loved each other, and had a stock of thoughts in common,
might laugh over their shabby furniture, and their calculations how far
they could afford butter and eggs.  But the glimpse of that poetry
seemed as far off from him as the carelessness of the golden age; in
poor Rosamond's mind there was not room enough for luxuries to look
small in.  He got down from his horse in a very sad mood, and went into
the house, not expecting to be cheered except by his dinner, and
reflecting that before the evening closed it would be wise to tell
Rosamond of his application to Bulstrode and its failure.  It would be
well not to lose time in preparing her for the worst.

But his dinner waited long for him before he was able to eat it.  For
on entering he found that Dover's agent had already put a man in the
house, and when he asked where Mrs. Lydgate was, he was told that she
was in her bedroom.  He went up and found her stretched on the bed pale
and silent, without an answer even in her face to any word or look of
his.  He sat down by the bed and leaning over her said with almost a
cry of prayer--

"Forgive me for this misery, my poor Rosamond!  Let us only love one
another."

She looked at him silently, still with the blank despair on her face;
but then the tears began to fill her blue eyes, and her lip trembled.
The strong man had had too much to bear that day.  He let his head fall
beside hers and sobbed.

He did not hinder her from going to her father early in the morning--it
seemed now that he ought not to hinder her from doing as she
pleased.  In half an hour she came back, and said that papa and mamma
wished her to go and stay with them while things were in this miserable
state.  Papa said he could do nothing about the debt--if he paid this,
there would be half-a-dozen more.  She had better come back home again
till Lydgate had got a comfortable home for her.  "Do you object,
Tertius?"

"Do as you like," said Lydgate.  "But things are not coming to a crisis
immediately.  There is no hurry."

"I should not go till to-morrow," said Rosamond; "I shall want to pack
my clothes."

"Oh, I would wait a little longer than to-morrow--there is no knowing
what may happen," said Lydgate, with bitter irony.  "I may get my neck
broken, and that may make things easier to you."

It was Lydgate's misfortune and Rosamond's too, that his tenderness
towards her, which was both an emotional prompting and a
well-considered resolve, was inevitably interrupted by these outbursts
of indignation either ironical or remonstrant.  She thought them
totally unwarranted, and the repulsion which this exceptional severity
excited in her was in danger of making the more persistent tenderness
unacceptable.

"I see you do not wish me to go," she said, with chill mildness; "why
can you not say so, without that kind of violence?  I shall stay until
you request me to do otherwise."

Lydgate said no more, but went out on his rounds.  He felt bruised and
shattered, and there was a dark line under his eyes which Rosamond had
not seen before.  She could not bear to look at him.  Tertius had a way
of taking things which made them a great deal worse for her.



CHAPTER LXX.

    Our deeds still travel with us from afar,
    And what we have been makes us what we are."


Bulstrode's first object after Lydgate had left Stone Court was to
examine Raffles's pockets, which he imagined were sure to carry signs
in the shape of hotel-bills of the places he had stopped in, if he had
not told the truth in saying that he had come straight from Liverpool
because he was ill and had no money.  There were various bills crammed
into his pocketbook, but none of a later date than Christmas at any
other place, except one, which bore date that morning.  This was
crumpled up with a hand-bill about a horse-fair in one of his
tail-pockets, and represented the cost of three days' stay at an inn at
Bilkley, where the fair was held--a town at least forty miles from
Middlemarch.  The bill was heavy, and since Raffles had no luggage with
him, it seemed probable that he had left his portmanteau behind in
payment, in order to save money for his travelling fare; for his purse
was empty, and he had only a couple of sixpences and some loose pence
in his pockets.

Bulstrode gathered a sense of safety from these indications that
Raffles had really kept at a distance from Middlemarch since his
memorable visit at Christmas.  At a distance and among people who were
strangers to Bulstrode, what satisfaction could there be to Raffles's
tormenting, self-magnifying vein in telling old scandalous stories
about a Middlemarch banker?  And what harm if he did talk?  The chief
point now was to keep watch over him as long as there was any danger of
that intelligible raving, that unaccountable impulse to tell, which
seemed to have acted towards Caleb Garth; and Bulstrode felt much
anxiety lest some such impulse should come over him at the sight of
Lydgate.  He sat up alone with him through the night, only ordering the
housekeeper to lie down in her clothes, so as to be ready when he
called her, alleging his own indisposition to sleep, and his anxiety to
carry out the doctor's orders.  He did carry them out faithfully,
although Raffles was incessantly asking for brandy, and declaring that
he was sinking away--that the earth was sinking away from under him.
He was restless and sleepless, but still quailing and manageable.  On
the offer of the food ordered by Lydgate, which he refused, and the
denial of other things which he demanded, he seemed to concentrate all
his terror on Bulstrode, imploringly deprecating his anger, his revenge
on him by starvation, and declaring with strong oaths that he had never
told any mortal a word against him.  Even this Bulstrode felt that he
would not have liked Lydgate to hear; but a more alarming sign of
fitful alternation in his delirium was, that in-the morning twilight
Raffles suddenly seemed to imagine a doctor present, addressing him and
declaring that Bulstrode wanted to starve him to death out of revenge
for telling, when he never had told.

Bulstrode's native imperiousness and strength of determination served
him well.  This delicate-looking man, himself nervously perturbed,
found the needed stimulus in his strenuous circumstances, and through
that difficult night and morning, while he had the air of an animated
corpse returned to movement without warmth, holding the mastery by its
chill impassibility his mind was intensely at work thinking of what he
had to guard against and what would win him security.  Whatever prayers
he might lift up, whatever statements he might inwardly make of this
man's wretched spiritual condition, and the duty he himself was under
to submit to the punishment divinely appointed for him rather than to
wish for evil to another--through all this effort to condense words
into a solid mental state, there pierced and spread with irresistible
vividness the images of the events he desired.  And in the train of
those images came their apology.  He could not but see the death of
Raffles, and see in it his own deliverance.  What was the removal of
this wretched creature?  He was impenitent--but were not public
criminals impenitent?--yet the law decided on their fate.  Should
Providence in this case award death, there was no sin in contemplating
death as the desirable issue--if he kept his hands from hastening
it--if he scrupulously did what was prescribed.  Even here there might
be a mistake: human prescriptions were fallible things: Lydgate had
said that treatment had hastened death,--why not his own method of
treatment?  But of course intention was everything in the question of
right and wrong.

And Bulstrode set himself to keep his intention separate from his
desire.  He inwardly declared that he intended to obey orders.  Why
should he have got into any argument about the validity of these
orders?  It was only the common trick of desire--which avails itself of
any irrelevant scepticism, finding larger room for itself in all
uncertainty about effects, in every obscurity that looks like the
absence of law.  Still, he did obey the orders.

His anxieties continually glanced towards Lydgate, and his remembrance
of what had taken place between them the morning before was accompanied
with sensibilities which had not been roused at all during the actual
scene.  He had then cared but little about Lydgate's painful
impressions with regard to the suggested change in the Hospital, or
about the disposition towards himself which what he held to be his
justifiable refusal of a rather exorbitant request might call forth.
He recurred to the scene now with a perception that he had probably
made Lydgate his enemy, and with an awakened desire to propitiate him,
or rather to create in him a strong sense of personal obligation.  He
regretted that he had not at once made even an unreasonable
money-sacrifice. For in case of unpleasant suspicions, or even
knowledge gathered from the raving of Raffles, Bulstrode would have
felt that he had a defence in Lydgate's mind by having conferred a
momentous benefit on him.  But the regret had perhaps come too late.

Strange, piteous conflict in the soul of this unhappy man, who had
longed for years to be better than he was--who had taken his selfish
passions into discipline and clad them in severe robes, so that he had
walked with them as a devout choir, till now that a terror had risen
among them, and they could chant no longer, but threw out their common
cries for safety.

It was nearly the middle of the day before Lydgate arrived: he had
meant to come earlier, but had been detained, he said; and his
shattered looks were noticed by Balstrode.  But he immediately threw
himself into the consideration of the patient, and inquired strictly
into all that had occurred.  Raffles was worse, would take hardly any
food, was persistently wakeful and restlessly raving; but still not
violent.  Contrary to Bulstrode's alarmed expectation, he took little
notice of Lydgate's presence, and continued to talk or murmur
incoherently.

"What do you think of him?" said Bulstrode, in private.

"The symptoms are worse."

"You are less hopeful?"

"No; I still think he may come round.  Are you going to stay here
yourself?" said Lydgate, looking at Bulstrode with an abrupt question,
which made him uneasy, though in reality it was not due to any
suspicious conjecture.

"Yes, I think so," said Bulstrode, governing himself and speaking with
deliberation.  "Mrs. Bulstrode is advised of the reasons which detain
me.  Mrs. Abel and her husband are not experienced enough to be left
quite alone, and this kind of responsibility is scarcely included in
their service of me.  You have some fresh instructions, I presume."

The chief new instruction that Lydgate had to give was on the
administration of extremely moderate doses of opium, in case of the
sleeplessness continuing after several hours.  He had taken the
precaution of bringing opium in his pocket, and he gave minute
directions to Bulstrode as to the doses, and the point at which they
should cease.  He insisted on the risk of not ceasing; and repeated his
order that no alcohol should be given.

"From what I see of the case," he ended, "narcotism is the only thing I
should be much afraid of.  He may wear through even without much food.
There's a good deal of strength in him."

"You look ill yourself, Mr. Lydgate--a most unusual, I may say
unprecedented thing in my knowledge of you," said Bulstrode, showing a
solicitude as unlike his indifference the day before, as his present
recklessness about his own fatigue was unlike his habitual
self-cherishing anxiety.  "I fear you are harassed."

"Yes, I am," said Lydgate, brusquely, holding his hat, and ready to go.

"Something new, I fear," said Bulstrode, inquiringly.  "Pray be seated."

"No, thank you," said Lydgate, with some hauteur. "I mentioned to you
yesterday what was the state of my affairs.  There is nothing to add,
except that the execution has since then been actually put into my
house.  One can tell a good deal of trouble in a short sentence.  I
will say good morning."

"Stay, Mr. Lydgate, stay," said Bulstrode; "I have been reconsidering
this subject.  I was yesterday taken by surprise, and saw it
superficially.  Mrs. Bulstrode is anxious for her niece, and I myself
should grieve at a calamitous change in your position.  Claims on me
are numerous, but on reconsideration, I esteem it right that I should
incur a small sacrifice rather than leave you unaided.  You said, I
think, that a thousand pounds would suffice entirely to free you from
your burthens, and enable you to recover a firm stand?"

"Yes," said Lydgate, a great leap of joy within him surmounting every
other feeling; "that would pay all my debts, and leave me a little on
hand.  I could set about economizing in our way of living.  And
by-and-by my practice might look up."

"If you will wait a moment, Mr. Lydgate, I will draw a check to that
amount.  I am aware that help, to be effectual in these cases, should
be thorough."

While Bulstrode wrote, Lydgate turned to the window thinking of his
home--thinking of his life with its good start saved from frustration,
its good purposes still unbroken.

"You can give me a note of hand for this, Mr. Lydgate," said the
banker, advancing towards him with the check.  "And by-and-by, I hope,
you may be in circumstances gradually to repay me.  Meanwhile, I have
pleasure in thinking that you will be released from further difficulty."

"I am deeply obliged to you," said Lydgate.  "You have restored to me
the prospect of working with some happiness and some chance of good."

It appeared to him a very natural movement in Bulstrode that he should
have reconsidered his refusal: it corresponded with the more munificent
side of his character.  But as he put his hack into a canter, that he
might get the sooner home, and tell the good news to Rosamond, and get
cash at the bank to pay over to Dover's agent, there crossed his mind,
with an unpleasant impression, as from a dark-winged flight of evil
augury across his vision, the thought of that contrast in himself which
a few months had brought--that he should be overjoyed at being under a
strong personal obligation--that he should be overjoyed at getting
money for himself from Bulstrode.

The banker felt that he had done something to nullify one cause of
uneasiness, and yet he was scarcely the easier.  He did not measure the
quantity of diseased motive which had made him wish for Lydgate's
good-will, but the quantity was none the less actively there, like an
irritating agent in his blood.  A man vows, and yet will not cast away
the means of breaking his vow.  Is it that he distinctly means to break
it?  Not at all; but the desires which tend to break it are at work in
him dimly, and make their way into his imagination, and relax his
muscles in the very moments when he is telling himself over again the
reasons for his vow.  Raffles, recovering quickly, returning to the
free use of his odious powers--how could Bulstrode wish for that?
Raffles dead was the image that brought release, and indirectly he
prayed for that way of release, beseeching that, if it were possible,
the rest of his days here below might be freed from the threat of an
ignominy which would break him utterly as an instrument of God's
service.  Lydgate's opinion was not on the side of promise that this
prayer would be fulfilled; and as the day advanced, Bulstrode felt
himself getting irritated at the persistent life in this man, whom he
would fain have seen sinking into the silence of death: imperious will
stirred murderous impulses towards this brute life, over which will, by
itself, had no power.  He said inwardly that he was getting too much
worn; he would not sit up with the patient to-night, but leave him to
Mrs. Abel, who, if necessary, could call her husband.

At six o'clock, Raffles, having had only fitful perturbed snatches of
sleep, from which he waked with fresh restlessness and perpetual cries
that he was sinking away, Bulstrode began to administer the opium
according to Lydgate's directions.  At the end of half an hour or more
he called Mrs. Abel and told her that he found himself unfit for
further watching.  He must now consign the patient to her care; and he
proceeded to repeat to her Lydgate's directions as to the quantity of
each dose.  Mrs. Abel had not before known anything of Lydgate's
prescriptions; she had simply prepared and brought whatever Bulstrode
ordered, and had done what he pointed out to her.  She began now to ask
what else she should do besides administering the opium.

"Nothing at present, except the offer of the soup or the soda-water:
you can come to me for further directions.  Unless there is any
important change, I shall not come into the room again to-night. You
will ask your husband for help if necessary.  I must go to bed early."

"You've much need, sir, I'm sure," said Mrs. Abel, "and to take
something more strengthening than what you've done."

Bulstrode went away now without anxiety as to what Raffles might say in
his raving, which had taken on a muttering incoherence not likely to
create any dangerous belief.  At any rate he must risk this.  He went
down into the wainscoted parlor first, and began to consider whether he
would not have his horse saddled and go home by the moonlight, and give
up caring for earthly consequences.  Then, he wished that he had begged
Lydgate to come again that evening.  Perhaps he might deliver a
different opinion, and think that Raffles was getting into a less
hopeful state.  Should he send for Lydgate?  If Raffles were really
getting worse, and slowly dying, Bulstrode felt that he could go to bed
and sleep in gratitude to Providence.  But was he worse?  Lydgate might
come and simply say that he was going on as he expected, and predict
that he would by-and-by fall into a good sleep, and get well.  What was
the use of sending for him?  Bulstrode shrank from that result.  No
ideas or opinions could hinder him from seeing the one probability to
be, that Raffles recovered would be just the same man as before, with
his strength as a tormentor renewed, obliging him to drag away his wife
to spend her years apart from her friends and native place, carrying an
alienating suspicion against him in her heart.

He had sat an hour and a half in this conflict by the firelight only,
when a sudden thought made him rise and light the bed-candle, which he
had brought down with him.  The thought was, that he had not told Mrs.
Abel when the doses of opium must cease.

He took hold of the candlestick, but stood motionless for a long while.
She might already have given him more than Lydgate had prescribed.  But
it was excusable in him, that he should forget part of an order, in his
present wearied condition.  He walked up-stairs, candle in hand, not
knowing whether he should straightway enter his own room and go to bed,
or turn to the patient's room and rectify his omission.  He paused in
the passage, with his face turned towards Raffles's room, and he could
hear him moaning and murmuring.  He was not asleep, then.  Who could
know that Lydgate's prescription would not be better disobeyed than
followed, since there was still no sleep?

He turned into his own room.  Before he had quite undressed, Mrs. Abel
rapped at the door; he opened it an inch, so that he could hear her
speak low.

"If you please, sir, should I have no brandy nor nothing to give the
poor creetur?  He feels sinking away, and nothing else will he
swaller--and but little strength in it, if he did--only the opium.  And
he says more and more he's sinking down through the earth."

To her surprise, Mr. Bulstrode did not answer.  A struggle was going on
within him.

"I think he must die for want o' support, if he goes on in that way.
When I nursed my poor master, Mr. Robisson, I had to give him port-wine
and brandy constant, and a big glass at a time," added Mrs. Abel, with
a touch of remonstrance in her tone.

But again Mr. Bulstrode did not answer immediately, and she continued,
"It's not a time to spare when people are at death's door, nor would
you wish it, sir, I'm sure.  Else I should give him our own bottle o'
rum as we keep by us.  But a sitter-up so as you've been, and doing
everything as laid in your power--"

Here a key was thrust through the inch of doorway, and Mr. Bulstrode
said huskily, "That is the key of the wine-cooler. You will find plenty
of brandy there."

Early in the morning--about six--Mr. Bulstrode rose and spent some time
in prayer.  Does any one suppose that private prayer is necessarily
candid--necessarily goes to the roots of action?  Private prayer is
inaudible speech, and speech is representative: who can represent
himself just as he is, even in his own reflections?  Bulstrode had not
yet unravelled in his thought the confused promptings of the last
four-and-twenty hours.

He listened in the passage, and could hear hard stertorous breathing.
Then he walked out in the garden, and looked at the early rime on the
grass and fresh spring leaves.  When he re-entered the house, he felt
startled at the sight of Mrs. Abel.

"How is your patient--asleep, I think?" he said, with an attempt at
cheerfulness in his tone.

"He's gone very deep, sir," said Mrs. Abel.  "He went off gradual
between three and four o'clock.  Would you please to go and look at
him?  I thought it no harm to leave him.  My man's gone afield, and the
little girl's seeing to the kettles."

Bulstrode went up.  At a glance he knew that Raffles was not in the
sleep which brings revival, but in the sleep which streams deeper and
deeper into the gulf of death.

He looked round the room and saw a bottle with some brandy in it, and
the almost empty opium phial.  He put the phial out of sight, and
carried the brandy-bottle down-stairs with him, locking it again in the
wine-cooler.

While breakfasting he considered whether he should ride to Middlemarch
at once, or wait for Lydgate's arrival.  He decided to wait, and told
Mrs. Abel that she might go about her work--he could watch in the
bed-chamber.

As he sat there and beheld the enemy of his peace going irrevocably
into silence, he felt more at rest than he had done for many months.
His conscience was soothed by the enfolding wing of secrecy, which
seemed just then like an angel sent down for his relief.  He drew out
his pocket-book to review various memoranda there as to the
arrangements he had projected and partly carried out in the prospect of
quitting Middlemarch, and considered how far he would let them stand or
recall them, now that his absence would be brief.  Some economies which
he felt desirable might still find a suitable occasion in his temporary
withdrawal from management, and he hoped still that Mrs. Casaubon would
take a large share in the expenses of the Hospital.  In that way the
moments passed, until a change in the stertorous breathing was marked
enough to draw his attention wholly to the bed, and forced him to think
of the departing life, which had once been subservient to his
own--which he had once been glad to find base enough for him to act on
as he would.  It was his gladness then which impelled him now to be
glad that the life was at an end.

And who could say that the death of Raffles had been hastened?  Who
knew what would have saved him?

Lydgate arrived at half-past ten, in time to witness the final pause of
the breath.  When he entered the room Bulstrode observed a sudden
expression in his face, which was not so much surprise as a recognition
that he had not judged correctly.  He stood by the bed in silence for
some time, with his eyes turned on the dying man, but with that subdued
activity of expression which showed that he was carrying on an inward
debate.

"When did this change begin?" said he, looking at Bulstrode.

"I did not watch by him last night," said Bulstrode.  "I was over-worn,
and left him under Mrs. Abel's care.  She said that he sank into sleep
between three and four o'clock.  When I came in before eight he was
nearly in this condition."

Lydgate did not ask another question, but watched in silence until he
said, "It's all over."

This morning Lydgate was in a state of recovered hope and freedom.  He
had set out on his work with all his old animation, and felt himself
strong enough to bear all the deficiencies of his married life.  And he
was conscious that Bulstrode had been a benefactor to him.  But he was
uneasy about this case.  He had not expected it to terminate as it had
done.  Yet he hardly knew how to put a question on the subject to
Bulstrode without appearing to insult him; and if he examined the
housekeeper--why, the man was dead.  There seemed to be no use in
implying that somebody's ignorance or imprudence had killed him.  And
after all, he himself might be wrong.

He and Bulstrode rode back to Middlemarch together, talking of many
things--chiefly cholera and the chances of the Reform Bill in the House
of Lords, and the firm resolve of the political Unions.  Nothing was
said about Raffles, except that Bulstrode mentioned the necessity of
having a grave for him in Lowick churchyard, and observed that, so far
as he knew, the poor man had no connections, except Rigg, whom he had
stated to be unfriendly towards him.

On returning home Lydgate had a visit from Mr. Farebrother.  The Vicar
had not been in the town the day before, but the news that there was an
execution in Lydgate's house had got to Lowick by the evening, having
been carried by Mr. Spicer, shoemaker and parish-clerk, who had it from
his brother, the respectable bell-hanger in Lowick Gate.  Since that
evening when Lydgate had come down from the billiard room with Fred
Vincy, Mr. Farebrother's thoughts about him had been rather gloomy.
Playing at the Green Dragon once or oftener might have been a trifle in
another man; but in Lydgate it was one of several signs that he was
getting unlike his former self.  He was beginning to do things for
which he had formerly even an excessive scorn.  Whatever certain
dissatisfactions in marriage, which some silly tinklings of gossip had
given him hints of, might have to do with this change, Mr. Farebrother
felt sure that it was chiefly connected with the debts which were being
more and more distinctly reported, and he began to fear that any notion
of Lydgate's having resources or friends in the background must be
quite illusory.  The rebuff he had met with in his first attempt to win
Lydgate's confidence, disinclined him to a second; but this news of the
execution being actually in the house, determined the Vicar to overcome
his reluctance.

Lydgate had just dismissed a poor patient, in whom he was much
interested, and he came forward to put out his hand--with an open
cheerfulness which surprised Mr. Farebrother.  Could this too be a
proud rejection of sympathy and help?  Never mind; the sympathy and
help should be offered.

"How are you, Lydgate?  I came to see you because I had heard something
which made me anxious about you," said the Vicar, in the tone of a good
brother, only that there was no reproach in it.  They were both seated
by this time, and Lydgate answered immediately--

"I think I know what you mean.  You had heard that there was an
execution in the house?"

"Yes; is it true?"

"It was true," said Lydgate, with an air of freedom, as if he did not
mind talking about the affair now.  "But the danger is over; the debt
is paid.  I am out of my difficulties now: I shall be freed from debts,
and able, I hope, to start afresh on a better plan."

"I am very thankful to hear it," said the Vicar, falling back in his
chair, and speaking with that low-toned quickness which often follows
the removal of a load.  "I like that better than all the news in the
'Times.' I confess I came to you with a heavy heart."

"Thank you for coming," said Lydgate, cordially.  "I can enjoy the
kindness all the more because I am happier.  I have certainly been a
good deal crushed.  I'm afraid I shall find the bruises still painful
by-and by," he added, smiling rather sadly; "but just now I can only
feel that the torture-screw is off."

Mr. Farebrother was silent for a moment, and then said earnestly, "My
dear fellow, let me ask you one question.  Forgive me if I take a
liberty."

"I don't believe you will ask anything that ought to offend me."

"Then--this is necessary to set my heart quite at rest--you have
not--have you?--in order to pay your debts, incurred another debt which
may harass you worse hereafter?"

"No," said Lydgate, coloring slightly.  "There is no reason why I
should not tell you--since the fact is so--that the person to whom I am
indebted is Bulstrode.  He has made me a very handsome advance--a
thousand pounds--and he can afford to wait for repayment."

"Well, that is generous," said Mr. Farebrother, compelling himself to
approve of the man whom he disliked.  His delicate feeling shrank from
dwelling even in his thought on the fact that he had always urged
Lydgate to avoid any personal entanglement with Bulstrode.  He added
immediately, "And Bulstrode must naturally feel an interest in your
welfare, after you have worked with him in a way which has probably
reduced your income instead of adding to it.  I am glad to think that
he has acted accordingly."

Lydgate felt uncomfortable under these kindly suppositions.  They made
more distinct within him the uneasy consciousness which had shown its
first dim stirrings only a few hours before, that Bulstrode's motives
for his sudden beneficence following close upon the chillest
indifference might be merely selfish.  He let the kindly suppositions
pass.  He could not tell the history of the loan, but it was more
vividly present with him than ever, as well as the fact which the Vicar
delicately ignored--that this relation of personal indebtedness to
Bulstrode was what he had once been most resolved to avoid.

He began, instead of answering, to speak of his projected economies,
and of his having come to look at his life from a different point of
view.

"I shall set up a surgery," he said.  "I really think I made a mistaken
effort in that respect.  And if Rosamond will not mind, I shall take an
apprentice.  I don't like these things, but if one carries them out
faithfully they are not really lowering.  I have had a severe galling
to begin with: that will make the small rubs seem easy."

Poor Lydgate! the "if Rosamond will not mind," which had fallen from
him involuntarily as part of his thought, was a significant mark of the
yoke he bore.  But Mr. Farebrother, whose hopes entered strongly into
the same current with Lydgate's, and who knew nothing about him that
could now raise a melancholy presentiment, left him with affectionate
congratulation.



CHAPTER LXXI.

    Clown. . . . 'Twas in the Bunch of Grapes, where, indeed,
            you have a delight to sit, have you not?
    Froth. I have so: because it is an open room, and good for winter.
      Clo. Why, very well then: I hope here be truths.
                                     --Measure for Measure.


Five days after the death of Raffles, Mr. Bambridge was standing at his
leisure under the large archway leading into the yard of the Green
Dragon.  He was not fond of solitary contemplation, but he had only
just come out of the house, and any human figure standing at ease under
the archway in the early afternoon was as certain to attract
companionship as a pigeon which has found something worth pecking at.
In this case there was no material object to feed upon, but the eye of
reason saw a probability of mental sustenance in the shape of gossip.
Mr. Hopkins, the meek-mannered draper opposite, was the first to act on
this inward vision, being the more ambitious of a little masculine talk
because his customers were chiefly women.  Mr. Bambridge was rather
curt to the draper, feeling that Hopkins was of course glad to talk to
_him_, but that he was not going to waste much of his talk on Hopkins.
Soon, however, there was a small cluster of more important listeners,
who were either deposited from the passers-by, or had sauntered to the
spot expressly to see if there were anything going on at the Green
Dragon; and Mr. Bambridge was finding it worth his while to say many
impressive things about the fine studs he had been seeing and the
purchases he had made on a journey in the north from which he had just
returned.  Gentlemen present were assured that when they could show him
anything to cut out a blood mare, a bay, rising four, which was to be
seen at Doncaster if they chose to go and look at it, Mr. Bambridge
would gratify them by being shot "from here to Hereford."  Also, a pair
of blacks which he was going to put into the break recalled vividly to
his mind a pair which he had sold to Faulkner in '19, for a hundred
guineas, and which Faulkner had sold for a hundred and sixty two months
later--any gent who could disprove this statement being offered the
privilege of calling Mr. Bambridge by a very ugly name until the
exercise made his throat dry.

When the discourse was at this point of animation, came up Mr. Frank
Hawley.  He was not a man to compromise his dignity by lounging at the
Green Dragon, but happening to pass along the High Street and seeing
Bambridge on the other side, he took some of his long strides across to
ask the horsedealer whether he had found the first-rate gig-horse which
he had engaged to look for.  Mr. Hawley was requested to wait until he
had seen a gray selected at Bilkley: if that did not meet his wishes to
a hair, Bambridge did not know a horse when he saw it, which seemed to
be the highest conceivable unlikelihood.  Mr. Hawley, standing with his
back to the street, was fixing a time for looking at the gray and
seeing it tried, when a horseman passed slowly by.

"Bulstrode!" said two or three voices at once in a low tone, one of
them, which was the draper's, respectfully prefixing the "Mr.;" but
nobody having more intention in this interjectural naming than if they
had said "the Riverston coach" when that vehicle appeared in the
distance.  Mr. Hawley gave a careless glance round at Bulstrode's back,
but as Bambridge's eyes followed it he made a sarcastic grimace.

"By jingo! that reminds me," he began, lowering his voice a little, "I
picked up something else at Bilkley besides your gig-horse, Mr. Hawley.
I picked up a fine story about Bulstrode.  Do you know how he came by
his fortune?  Any gentleman wanting a bit of curious information, I can
give it him free of expense.  If everybody got their deserts, Bulstrode
might have had to say his prayers at Botany Bay."

"What do you mean?" said Mr. Hawley, thrusting his hands into his
pockets, and pushing a little forward under the archway.  If Bulstrode
should turn out to be a rascal, Frank Hawley had a prophetic soul.

"I had it from a party who was an old chum of Bulstrode's.  I'll tell
you where I first picked him up," said Bambridge, with a sudden gesture
of his fore-finger. "He was at Larcher's sale, but I knew nothing of
him then--he slipped through my fingers--was after Bulstrode, no
doubt.  He tells me he can tap Bulstrode to any amount, knows all his
secrets.  However, he blabbed to me at Bilkley: he takes a stiff glass.
Damme if I think he meant to turn king's evidence; but he's that sort
of bragging fellow, the bragging runs over hedge and ditch with him,
till he'd brag of a spavin as if it 'ud fetch money.  A man should know
when to pull up." Mr. Bambridge made this remark with an air of
disgust, satisfied that his own bragging showed a fine sense of the
marketable.

"What's the man's name?  Where can he be found?" said Mr. Hawley.

"As to where he is to be found, I left him to it at the Saracen's Head;
but his name is Raffles."

"Raffles!" exclaimed Mr. Hopkins.  "I furnished his funeral yesterday.
He was buried at Lowick.  Mr. Bulstrode followed him.  A very decent
funeral."  There was a strong sensation among the listeners.  Mr.
Bambridge gave an ejaculation in which "brimstone" was the mildest
word, and Mr. Hawley, knitting his brows and bending his head forward,
exclaimed, "What?--where did the man die?"

"At Stone Court," said the draper.  "The housekeeper said he was a
relation of the master's. He came there ill on Friday."

"Why, it was on Wednesday I took a glass with him," interposed
Bambridge.

"Did any doctor attend him?" said Mr. Hawley

"Yes.  Mr. Lydgate.  Mr. Bulstrode sat up with him one night.  He died
the third morning."

"Go on, Bambridge," said Mr. Hawley, insistently.  "What did this
fellow say about Bulstrode?"

The group had already become larger, the town-clerk's presence being a
guarantee that something worth listening to was going on there; and Mr.
Bambridge delivered his narrative in the hearing of seven.  It was
mainly what we know, including the fact about Will Ladislaw, with some
local color and circumstance added: it was what Bulstrode had dreaded
the betrayal of--and hoped to have buried forever with the corpse of
Raffles--it was that haunting ghost of his earlier life which as he
rode past the archway of the Green Dragon he was trusting that
Providence had delivered him from.  Yes, Providence.  He had not
confessed to himself yet that he had done anything in the way of
contrivance to this end; he had accepted what seemed to have been
offered.  It was impossible to prove that he had done anything which
hastened the departure of that man's soul.

But this gossip about Bulstrode spread through Middlemarch like the
smell of fire.  Mr. Frank Hawley followed up his information by sending
a clerk whom he could trust to Stone Court on a pretext of inquiring
about hay, but really to gather all that could be learned about Raffles
and his illness from Mrs. Abel.  In this way it came to his knowledge
that Mr. Garth had carried the man to Stone Court in his gig; and Mr.
Hawley in consequence took an opportunity of seeing Caleb, calling at
his office to ask whether he had time to undertake an arbitration if it
were required, and then asking him incidentally about Raffles.  Caleb
was betrayed into no word injurious to Bulstrode beyond the fact which
he was forced to admit, that he had given up acting for him within the
last week.  Mr Hawley drew his inferences, and feeling convinced that
Raffles had told his story to Garth, and that Garth had given up
Bulstrode's affairs in consequence, said so a few hours later to Mr.
Toller.  The statement was passed on until it had quite lost the stamp
of an inference, and was taken as information coming straight from
Garth, so that even a diligent historian might have concluded Caleb to
be the chief publisher of Bulstrode's misdemeanors.

Mr. Hawley was not slow to perceive that there was no handle for the
law either in the revelations made by Raffles or in the circumstances
of his death.  He had himself ridden to Lowick village that he might
look at the register and talk over the whole matter with Mr.
Farebrother, who was not more surprised than the lawyer that an ugly
secret should have come to light about Bulstrode, though he had always
had justice enough in him to hinder his antipathy from turning into
conclusions.  But while they were talking another combination was
silently going forward in Mr. Farebrother's mind, which foreshadowed
what was soon to be loudly spoken of in Middlemarch as a necessary
"putting of two and two together."  With the reasons which kept
Bulstrode in dread of Raffles there flashed the thought that the dread
might have something to do with his munificence towards his medical
man; and though he resisted the suggestion that it had been consciously
accepted in any way as a bribe, he had a foreboding that this
complication of things might be of malignant effect on Lydgate's
reputation.  He perceived that Mr. Hawley knew nothing at present of
the sudden relief from debt, and he himself was careful to glide away
from all approaches towards the subject.

"Well," he said, with a deep breath, wanting to wind up the illimitable
discussion of what might have been, though nothing could be legally
proven, "it is a strange story.  So our mercurial Ladislaw has a queer
genealogy!  A high-spirited young lady and a musical Polish patriot
made a likely enough stock for him to spring from, but I should never
have suspected a grafting of the Jew pawnbroker.  However, there's no
knowing what a mixture will turn out beforehand.  Some sorts of dirt
serve to clarify."

"It's just what I should have expected," said Mr. Hawley, mounting his
horse.  "Any cursed alien blood, Jew, Corsican, or Gypsy."

"I know he's one of your black sheep, Hawley.  But he is really a
disinterested, unworldly fellow," said Mr. Farebrother, smiling.

"Ay, ay, that is your Whiggish twist," said Mr. Hawley, who had been in
the habit of saying apologetically that Farebrother was such a damned
pleasant good-hearted fellow you would mistake him for a Tory.

Mr. Hawley rode home without thinking of Lydgate's attendance on
Raffles in any other light than as a piece of evidence on the side of
Bulstrode.  But the news that Lydgate had all at once become able not
only to get rid of the execution in his house but to pay all his debts
in Middlemarch was spreading fast, gathering round it conjectures and
comments which gave it new body and impetus, and soon filling the ears
of other persons besides Mr. Hawley, who were not slow to see a
significant relation between this sudden command of money and
Bulstrode's desire to stifle the scandal of Raffles.  That the money
came from Bulstrode would infallibly have been guessed even if there
had been no direct evidence of it; for it had beforehand entered into
the gossip about Lydgate's affairs, that neither his father-in-law nor
his own family would do anything for him, and direct evidence was
furnished not only by a clerk at the Bank, but by innocent Mrs.
Bulstrode herself, who mentioned the loan to Mrs. Plymdale, who
mentioned it to her daughter-in-law of the house of Toller, who
mentioned it generally.  The business was felt to be so public and
important that it required dinners to feed it, and many invitations
were just then issued and accepted on the strength of this scandal
concerning Bulstrode and Lydgate; wives, widows, and single ladies took
their work and went out to tea oftener than usual; and all public
conviviality, from the Green Dragon to Dollop's, gathered a zest which
could not be won from the question whether the Lords would throw out
the Reform Bill.

For hardly anybody doubted that some scandalous reason or other was at
the bottom of Bulstrode's liberality to Lydgate.  Mr. Hawley indeed, in
the first instance, invited a select party, including the two
physicians, with Mr Toller and Mr. Wrench, expressly to hold a close
discussion as to the probabilities of Raffles's illness, reciting to
them all the particulars which had been gathered from Mrs. Abel in
connection with Lydgate's certificate, that the death was due to
delirium tremens; and the medical gentlemen, who all stood
undisturbedly on the old paths in relation to this disease, declared
that they could see nothing in these particulars which could be
transformed into a positive ground of suspicion.  But the moral grounds
of suspicion remained: the strong motives Bulstrode clearly had for
wishing to be rid of Raffles, and the fact that at this critical moment
he had given Lydgate the help which he must for some time have known
the need for; the disposition, moreover, to believe that Bulstrode
would be unscrupulous, and the absence of any indisposition to believe
that Lydgate might be as easily bribed as other haughty-minded men when
they have found themselves in want of money.  Even if the money had
been given merely to make him hold his tongue about the scandal of
Bulstrode's earlier life, the fact threw an odious light on Lydgate,
who had long been sneered at as making himself subservient to the
banker for the sake of working himself into predominance, and
discrediting the elder members of his profession.  Hence, in spite of
the negative as to any direct sign of guilt in relation to the death at
Stone Court, Mr. Hawley's select party broke up with the sense that the
affair had "an ugly look."

But this vague conviction of indeterminable guilt, which was enough to
keep up much head-shaking and biting innuendo even among substantial
professional seniors, had for the general mind all the superior power
of mystery over fact.  Everybody liked better to conjecture how the
thing was, than simply to know it; for conjecture soon became more
confident than knowledge, and had a more liberal allowance for the
incompatible.  Even the more definite scandal concerning Bulstrode's
earlier life was, for some minds, melted into the mass of mystery, as
so much lively metal to be poured out in dialogue, and to take such
fantastic shapes as heaven pleased.

This was the tone of thought chiefly sanctioned by Mrs. Dollop, the
spirited landlady of the Tankard in Slaughter Lane, who had often to
resist the shallow pragmatism of customers disposed to think that their
reports from the outer world were of equal force with what had "come
up" in her mind.  How it had been brought to her she didn't know, but
it was there before her as if it had been "scored with the chalk on the
chimney-board--" as Bulstrode should say, "his inside was _that black_
as if the hairs of his head knowed the thoughts of his heart, he'd tear
'em up by the roots."

"That's odd," said Mr. Limp, a meditative shoemaker, with weak eyes and
a piping voice.  "Why, I read in the 'Trumpet' that was what the Duke
of Wellington said when he turned his coat and went over to the Romans."

"Very like," said Mrs. Dollop.  "If one raskill said it, it's more
reason why another should.  But hypo_crite_ as he's been, and holding
things with that high hand, as there was no parson i' the country good
enough for him, he was forced to take Old Harry into his counsel, and
Old Harry's been too many for him."

"Ay, ay, he's a 'complice you can't send out o' the country," said Mr.
Crabbe, the glazier, who gathered much news and groped among it dimly.
"But by what I can make out, there's them says Bulstrode was for
running away, for fear o' being found out, before now."

"He'll be drove away, whether or no," said Mr. Dill, the barber, who
had just dropped in.  "I shaved Fletcher, Hawley's clerk, this
morning--he's got a bad finger--and he says they're all of one mind to
get rid of Bulstrode.  Mr. Thesiger is turned against him, and wants
him out o' the parish.  And there's gentlemen in this town says they'd
as soon dine with a fellow from the hulks.  'And a deal sooner I
would,' says Fletcher; 'for what's more against one's stomach than a
man coming and making himself bad company with his religion, and giving
out as the Ten Commandments are not enough for him, and all the while
he's worse than half the men at the tread-mill?' Fletcher said so
himself."

"It'll be a bad thing for the town though, if Bulstrode's money goes
out of it," said Mr. Limp, quaveringly.

"Ah, there's better folks spend their money worse," said a firm-voiced
dyer, whose crimson hands looked out of keeping with his good-natured
face.

"But he won't keep his money, by what I can make out," said the
glazier.  "Don't they say as there's somebody can strip it off him?  By
what I can understan', they could take every penny off him, if they
went to lawing."

"No such thing!" said the barber, who felt himself a little above his
company at Dollop's, but liked it none the worse.  "Fletcher says it's
no such thing.  He says they might prove over and over again whose
child this young Ladislaw was, and they'd do no more than if they
proved I came out of the Fens--he couldn't touch a penny."

"Look you there now!" said Mrs. Dollop, indignantly.  "I thank the Lord
he took my children to Himself, if that's all the law can do for the
motherless.  Then by that, it's o' no use who your father and mother
is.  But as to listening to what one lawyer says without asking
another--I wonder at a man o' your cleverness, Mr. Dill.  It's well
known there's always two sides, if no more; else who'd go to law, I
should like to know?  It's a poor tale, with all the law as there is up
and down, if it's no use proving whose child you are.  Fletcher may say
that if he likes, but I say, don't Fletcher _me_!"

Mr. Dill affected to laugh in a complimentary way at Mrs. Dollop, as a
woman who was more than a match for the lawyers; being disposed to
submit to much twitting from a landlady who had a long score against
him.

"If they come to lawing, and it's all true as folks say, there's more
to be looked to nor money," said the glazier.  "There's this poor
creetur as is dead and gone; by what I can make out, he'd seen the day
when he was a deal finer gentleman nor Bulstrode."

"Finer gentleman!  I'll warrant him," said Mrs. Dollop; "and a far
personabler man, by what I can hear.  As I said when Mr. Baldwin, the
tax-gatherer, comes in, a-standing where you sit, and says, 'Bulstrode
got all his money as he brought into this town by thieving and
swindling,'--I said, 'You don't make me no wiser, Mr. Baldwin: it's set
my blood a-creeping to look at him ever sin' here he came into
Slaughter Lane a-wanting to buy the house over my head: folks don't
look the color o' the dough-tub and stare at you as if they wanted to
see into your backbone for nothingk.'  That was what I said, and Mr.
Baldwin can bear me witness."

"And in the rights of it too," said Mr. Crabbe.  "For by what I can
make out, this Raffles, as they call him, was a lusty, fresh-colored
man as you'd wish to see, and the best o' company--though dead he lies
in Lowick churchyard sure enough; and by what I can understan', there's
them knows more than they _should_ know about how he got there."

"I'll believe you!" said Mrs. Dallop, with a touch of scorn at Mr.
Crabbe's apparent dimness.  "When a man's been 'ticed to a lone house,
and there's them can pay for hospitals and nurses for half the
country-side choose to be sitters-up night and day, and nobody to come
near but a doctor as is known to stick at nothingk, and as poor as he
can hang together, and after that so flush o' money as he can pay off
Mr. Byles the butcher as his bill has been running on for the best o'
joints since last Michaelmas was a twelvemonth--I don't want anybody to
come and tell me as there's been more going on nor the Prayer-book's
got a service for--I don't want to stand winking and blinking and
thinking."

Mrs. Dollop looked round with the air of a landlady accustomed to
dominate her company.  There was a chorus of adhesion from the more
courageous; but Mr. Limp, after taking a draught, placed his flat hands
together and pressed them hard between his knees, looking down at them
with blear-eyed contemplation, as if the scorching power of Mrs.
Dollop's speech had quite dried up and nullified his wits until they
could be brought round again by further moisture.

"Why shouldn't they dig the man up and have the Crowner?" said the
dyer.  "It's been done many and many's the time.  If there's been foul
play they might find it out."

"Not they, Mr. Jonas!" said Mrs Dollop, emphatically.  "I know what
doctors are.  They're a deal too cunning to be found out.  And this
Doctor Lydgate that's been for cutting up everybody before the breath
was well out o' their body--it's plain enough what use he wanted to
make o' looking into respectable people's insides.  He knows drugs, you
may be sure, as you can neither smell nor see, neither before they're
swallowed nor after.  Why, I've seen drops myself ordered by Doctor
Gambit, as is our club doctor and a good charikter, and has brought
more live children into the world nor ever another i' Middlemarch--I
say I've seen drops myself as made no difference whether they was in
the glass or out, and yet have griped you the next day.  So I'll leave
your own sense to judge.  Don't tell me!  All I say is, it's a mercy
they didn't take this Doctor Lydgate on to our club.  There's many a
mother's child might ha' rued it."

The heads of this discussion at "Dollop's" had been the common theme
among all classes in the town, had been carried to Lowick Parsonage on
one side and to Tipton Grange on the other, had come fully to the ears
of the Vincy family, and had been discussed with sad reference to "poor
Harriet" by all Mrs. Bulstrode's friends, before Lydgate knew
distinctly why people were looking strangely at him, and before
Bulstrode himself suspected the betrayal of his secrets.  He had not
been accustomed to very cordial relations with his neighbors, and hence
he could not miss the signs of cordiality; moreover, he had been taking
journeys on business of various kinds, having now made up his mind that
he need not quit Middlemarch, and feeling able consequently to
determine on matters which he had before left in suspense.

"We will make a journey to Cheltenham in the course of a month or two,"
he had said to his wife.  "There are great spiritual advantages to be
had in that town along with the air and the waters, and six weeks there
will be eminently refreshing to us."

He really believed in the spiritual advantages, and meant that his life
henceforth should be the more devoted because of those later sins which
he represented to himself as hypothetic, praying hypothetically for
their pardon:--"if I have herein transgressed."

As to the Hospital, he avoided saying anything further to Lydgate,
fearing to manifest a too sudden change of plans immediately on the
death of Raffles.  In his secret soul he believed that Lydgate
suspected his orders to have been intentionally disobeyed, and
suspecting this he must also suspect a motive. But nothing had been
betrayed to him as to the history of Raffles, and Bulstrode was anxious
not to do anything which would give emphasis to his undefined
suspicions.  As to any certainty that a particular method of treatment
would either save or kill, Lydgate himself was constantly arguing
against such dogmatism; he had no right to speak, and he had every
motive for being silent.  Hence Bulstrode felt himself providentially
secured.  The only incident he had strongly winced under had been an
occasional encounter with Caleb Garth, who, however, had raised his hat
with mild gravity.

Meanwhile, on the part of the principal townsmen a strong determination
was growing against him.

A meeting was to be held in the Town-Hall on a sanitary question which
had risen into pressing importance by the occurrence of a cholera case
in the town.  Since the Act of Parliament, which had been hurriedly
passed, authorizing assessments for sanitary measures, there had been a
Board for the superintendence of such measures appointed in
Middlemarch, and much cleansing and preparation had been concurred in
by Whigs and Tories.  The question now was, whether a piece of ground
outside the town should be secured as a burial-ground by means of
assessment or by private subscription.  The meeting was to be open, and
almost everybody of importance in the town was expected to be there.

Mr. Bulstrode was a member of the Board, and just before twelve o'clock
he started from the Bank with the intention of urging the plan of
private subscription.  Under the hesitation of his projects, he had for
some time kept himself in the background, and he felt that he should
this morning resume his old position as a man of action and influence
in the public affairs of the town where he expected to end his days.
Among the various persons going in the same direction, he saw Lydgate;
they joined, talked over the object of the meeting, and entered it
together.

It seemed that everybody of mark had been earlier than they.  But there
were still spaces left near the head of the large central table, and
they made their way thither.  Mr. Farebrother sat opposite, not far
from Mr. Hawley; all the medical men were there; Mr. Thesiger was in
the chair, and Mr. Brooke of Tipton was on his right hand.

Lydgate noticed a peculiar interchange of glances when he and Bulstrode
took their seats.

After the business had been fully opened by the chairman, who pointed
out the advantages of purchasing by subscription a piece of ground
large enough to be ultimately used as a general cemetery, Mr.
Bulstrode, whose rather high-pitched but subdued and fluent voice the
town was used to at meetings of this sort, rose and asked leave to
deliver his opinion.  Lydgate could see again the peculiar interchange
of glances before Mr. Hawley started up, and said in his firm resonant
voice, "Mr. Chairman, I request that before any one delivers his
opinion on this point I may be permitted to speak on a question of
public feeling, which not only by myself, but by many gentlemen
present, is regarded as preliminary."

Mr. Hawley's mode of speech, even when public decorum repressed his
"awful language," was formidable in its curtness and self-possession.
Mr. Thesiger sanctioned the request, Mr. Bulstrode sat down, and Mr.
Hawley continued.

"In what I have to say, Mr. Chairman, I am not speaking simply on my
own behalf: I am speaking with the concurrence and at the express
request of no fewer than eight of my fellow-townsmen, who are
immediately around us.  It is our united sentiment that Mr. Bulstrode
should be called upon--and I do now call upon him--to resign public
positions which he holds not simply as a tax-payer, but as a gentleman
among gentlemen.  There are practices and there are acts which, owing
to circumstances, the law cannot visit, though they may be worse than
many things which are legally punishable.  Honest men and gentlemen, if
they don't want the company of people who perpetrate such acts, have
got to defend themselves as they best can, and that is what I and the
friends whom I may call my clients in this affair are determined to do.
I don't say that Mr. Bulstrode has been guilty of shameful acts, but I
call upon him either publicly to deny and confute the scandalous
statements made against him by a man now dead, and who died in his
house--the statement that he was for many years engaged in nefarious
practices, and that he won his fortune by dishonest procedures--or else
to withdraw from positions which could only have been allowed him as a
gentleman among gentlemen."

All eyes in the room were turned on Mr. Bulstrode, who, since the first
mention of his name, had been going through a crisis of feeling almost
too violent for his delicate frame to support.  Lydgate, who himself
was undergoing a shock as from the terrible practical interpretation of
some faint augury, felt, nevertheless, that his own movement of
resentful hatred was checked by that instinct of the Healer which
thinks first of bringing rescue or relief to the sufferer, when he
looked at the shrunken misery of Bulstrode's livid face.

The quick vision that his life was after all a failure, that he was a
dishonored man, and must quail before the glance of those towards whom
he had habitually assumed the attitude of a reprover--that God had
disowned him before men and left him unscreened to the triumphant scorn
of those who were glad to have their hatred justified--the sense of
utter futility in that equivocation with his conscience in dealing with
the life of his accomplice, an equivocation which now turned venomously
upon him with the full-grown fang of a discovered lie:--all this
rushed through him like the agony of terror which fails to kill, and
leaves the ears still open to the returning wave of execration.  The
sudden sense of exposure after the re-established sense of safety
came--not to the coarse organization of a criminal but to--the
susceptible nerve of a man whose intensest being lay in such mastery
and predominance as the conditions of his life had shaped for him.

But in that intense being lay the strength of reaction.  Through all
his bodily infirmity there ran a tenacious nerve of ambitious
self-preserving will, which had continually leaped out like a flame,
scattering all doctrinal fears, and which, even while he sat an object
of compassion for the merciful, was beginning to stir and glow under
his ashy paleness.  Before the last words were out of Mr. Hawley's
mouth, Bulstrode felt that he should answer, and that his answer would
be a retort.  He dared not get up and say, "I am not guilty, the whole
story is false"--even if he had dared this, it would have seemed to
him, under his present keen sense of betrayal, as vain as to pull, for
covering to his nakedness, a frail rag which would rend at every little
strain.

For a few moments there was total silence, while every man in the room
was looking at Bulstrode.  He sat perfectly still, leaning hard against
the back of his chair; he could not venture to rise, and when he began
to speak he pressed his hands upon the seat on each side of him.  But
his voice was perfectly audible, though hoarser than usual, and his
words were distinctly pronounced, though he paused between sentence as
if short of breath.  He said, turning first toward Mr. Thesiger, and
then looking at Mr. Hawley--

"I protest before you, sir, as a Christian minister, against the
sanction of proceedings towards me which are dictated by virulent
hatred.  Those who are hostile to me are glad to believe any libel
uttered by a loose tongue against me.  And their consciences become
strict against me.  Say that the evil-speaking of which I am to be made
the victim accuses me of malpractices--" here Bulstrode's voice rose
and took on a more biting accent, till it seemed a low cry--"who shall
be my accuser?  Not men whose own lives are unchristian, nay,
scandalous--not men who themselves use low instruments to carry out
their ends--whose profession is a tissue of chicanery--who have been
spending their income on their own sensual enjoyments, while I have
been devoting mine to advance the best objects with regard to this life
and the next."

After the word chicanery there was a growing noise, half of murmurs and
half of hisses, while four persons started up at once--Mr. Hawley, Mr.
Toller, Mr. Chichely, and Mr. Hackbutt; but Mr. Hawley's outburst was
instantaneous, and left the others behind in silence.

"If you mean me, sir, I call you and every one else to the inspection
of my professional life.  As to Christian or unchristian, I repudiate
your canting palavering Christianity; and as to the way in which I
spend my income, it is not my principle to maintain thieves and cheat
offspring of their due inheritance in order to support religion and set
myself up as a saintly Killjoy.  I affect no niceness of conscience--I
have not found any nice standards necessary yet to measure your actions
by, sir.  And I again call upon you to enter into satisfactory
explanations concerning the scandals against you, or else to withdraw
from posts in which we at any rate decline you as a colleague.  I say,
sir, we decline to co-operate with a man whose character is not cleared
from infamous lights cast upon it, not only by reports but by recent
actions."

"Allow me, Mr. Hawley," said the chairman; and Mr. Hawley, still
fuming, bowed half impatiently, and sat down with his hands thrust deep
in his pockets.

"Mr. Bulstrode, it is not desirable, I think, to prolong the present
discussion," said Mr. Thesiger, turning to the pallid trembling man; "I
must so far concur with what has fallen from Mr. Hawley in expression
of a general feeling, as to think it due to your Christian profession
that you should clear yourself, if possible, from unhappy aspersions.
I for my part should be willing to give you full opportunity and
hearing.  But I must say that your present attitude is painfully
inconsistent with those principles which you have sought to identify
yourself with, and for the honor of which I am bound to care.  I
recommend you at present, as your clergyman, and one who hopes for your
reinstatement in respect, to quit the room, and avoid further hindrance
to business."

Bulstrode, after a moment's hesitation, took his hat from the floor and
slowly rose, but he grasped the corner of the chair so totteringly that
Lydgate felt sure there was not strength enough in him to walk away
without support.  What could he do?  He could not see a man sink close
to him for want of help.  He rose and gave his arm to Bulstrode, and in
that way led him out of the room; yet this act, which might have been
one of gentle duty and pure compassion, was at this moment unspeakably
bitter to him.  It seemed as if he were putting his sign-manual to that
association of himself with Bulstrode, of which he now saw the full
meaning as it must have presented itself to other minds.  He now felt
the conviction that this man who was leaning tremblingly on his arm,
had given him the thousand pounds as a bribe, and that somehow the
treatment of Raffles had been tampered with from an evil motive.  The
inferences were closely linked enough; the town knew of the loan,
believed it to be a bribe, and believed that he took it as a bribe.

Poor Lydgate, his mind struggling under the terrible clutch of this
revelation, was all the while morally forced to take Mr. Bulstrode to
the Bank, send a man off for his carriage, and wait to accompany him
home.

Meanwhile the business of the meeting was despatched, and fringed off
into eager discussion among various groups concerning this affair of
Bulstrode--and Lydgate.

Mr. Brooke, who had before heard only imperfect hints of it, and was
very uneasy that he had "gone a little too far" in countenancing
Bulstrode, now got himself fully informed, and felt some benevolent
sadness in talking to Mr. Farebrother about the ugly light in which
Lydgate had come to be regarded.  Mr. Farebrother was going to walk
back to Lowick.

"Step into my carriage," said Mr. Brooke.  "I am going round to see
Mrs. Casaubon.  She was to come back from Yorkshire last night.  She
will like to see me, you know."

So they drove along, Mr. Brooke chatting with good-natured hope that
there had not really been anything black in Lydgate's behavior--a
young fellow whom he had seen to be quite above the common mark, when
he brought a letter from his uncle Sir Godwin.  Mr. Farebrother said
little: he was deeply mournful: with a keen perception of human
weakness, he could not be confident that under the pressure of
humiliating needs Lydgate had not fallen below himself.

When the carriage drove up to the gate of the Manor, Dorothea was out
on the gravel, and came to greet them.

"Well, my dear," said Mr. Brooke, "we have just come from a meeting--a
sanitary meeting, you know."

"Was Mr. Lydgate there?" said Dorothea, who looked full of health and
animation, and stood with her head bare under the gleaming April
lights.  "I want to see him and have a great consultation with him
about the Hospital.  I have engaged with Mr. Bulstrode to do so."

"Oh, my dear," said Mr. Brooke, "we have been hearing bad news--bad
news, you know."

They walked through the garden towards the churchyard gate, Mr.
Farebrother wanting to go on to the parsonage; and Dorothea heard the
whole sad story.

She listened with deep interest, and begged to hear twice over the
facts and impressions concerning Lydgate.  After a short silence,
pausing at the churchyard gate, and addressing Mr. Farebrother, she
said energetically--

"You don't believe that Mr. Lydgate is guilty of anything base?  I will
not believe it.  Let us find out the truth and clear him!"





BOOK VIII.





SUNSET AND SUNRISE.



CHAPTER LXXII.

    Full souls are double mirrors, making still
    An endless vista of fair things before,
    Repeating things behind.


Dorothea's impetuous generosity, which would have leaped at once to the
vindication of Lydgate from the suspicion of having accepted money as a
bribe, underwent a melancholy check when she came to consider all the
circumstances of the case by the light of Mr. Farebrother's experience.

"It is a delicate matter to touch," he said.  "How can we begin to
inquire into it?  It must be either publicly by setting the magistrate
and coroner to work, or privately by questioning Lydgate.  As to the
first proceeding there is no solid ground to go upon, else Hawley would
have adopted it; and as to opening the subject with Lydgate, I confess
I should shrink from it.  He would probably take it as a deadly insult.
I have more than once experienced the difficulty of speaking to him on
personal matters.  And--one should know the truth about his conduct
beforehand, to feel very confident of a good result."

"I feel convinced that his conduct has not been guilty: I believe that
people are almost always better than their neighbors think they are,"
said Dorothea.  Some of her intensest experience in the last two years
had set her mind strongly in opposition to any unfavorable construction
of others; and for the first time she felt rather discontented with Mr.
Farebrother.  She disliked this cautious weighing of consequences,
instead of an ardent faith in efforts of justice and mercy, which would
conquer by their emotional force.  Two days afterwards, he was dining
at the Manor with her uncle and the Chettams, and when the dessert was
standing uneaten, the servants were out of the room, and Mr. Brooke was
nodding in a nap, she returned to the subject with renewed vivacity.

"Mr. Lydgate would understand that if his friends hear a calumny about
him their first wish must be to justify him.  What do we live for, if
it is not to make life less difficult to each other?  I cannot be
indifferent to the troubles of a man who advised me in _my_ trouble,
and attended me in my illness."

Dorothea's tone and manner were not more energetic than they had been
when she was at the head of her uncle's table nearly three years
before, and her experience since had given her more right to express a
decided opinion.  But Sir James Chettam was no longer the diffident and
acquiescent suitor: he was the anxious brother-in-law, with a devout
admiration for his sister, but with a constant alarm lest she should
fall under some new illusion almost as bad as marrying Casaubon.  He
smiled much less; when he said "Exactly" it was more often an
introduction to a dissentient opinion than in those submissive bachelor
days; and Dorothea found to her surprise that she had to resolve not to
be afraid of him--all the more because he was really her best friend.
He disagreed with her now.

"But, Dorothea," he said, remonstrantly, "you can't undertake to manage
a man's life for him in that way.  Lydgate must know--at least he will
soon come to know how he stands.  If he can clear himself, he will.  He
must act for himself."

"I think his friends must wait till they find an opportunity," added
Mr. Farebrother.  "It is possible--I have often felt so much weakness
in myself that I can conceive even a man of honorable disposition, such
as I have always believed Lydgate to be, succumbing to such a
temptation as that of accepting money which was offered more or less
indirectly as a bribe to insure his silence about scandalous facts long
gone by.  I say, I can conceive this, if he were under the pressure of
hard circumstances--if he had been harassed as I feel sure Lydgate has
been.  I would not believe anything worse of him except under stringent
proof.  But there is the terrible Nemesis following on some errors,
that it is always possible for those who like it to interpret them into
a crime: there is no proof in favor of the man outside his own
consciousness and assertion."

"Oh, how cruel!" said Dorothea, clasping her hands.  "And would you not
like to be the one person who believed in that man's innocence, if the
rest of the world belied him?  Besides, there is a man's character
beforehand to speak for him."

"But, my dear Mrs. Casaubon," said Mr. Farebrother, smiling gently at
her ardor, "character is not cut in marble--it is not something solid
and unalterable.  It is something living and changing, and may become
diseased as our bodies do."

"Then it may be rescued and healed," said Dorothea "I should not be
afraid of asking Mr. Lydgate to tell me the truth, that I might help
him.  Why should I be afraid?  Now that I am not to have the land,
James, I might do as Mr. Bulstrode proposed, and take his place in
providing for the Hospital; and I have to consult Mr. Lydgate, to know
thoroughly what are the prospects of doing good by keeping up the
present plans.  There is the best opportunity in the world for me to
ask for his confidence; and he would be able to tell me things which
might make all the circumstances clear.  Then we would all stand by him
and bring him out of his trouble.  People glorify all sorts of bravery
except the bravery they might show on behalf of their nearest
neighbors."  Dorothea's eyes had a moist brightness in them, and the
changed tones of her voice roused her uncle, who began to listen.

"It is true that a woman may venture on some efforts of sympathy which
would hardly succeed if we men undertook them," said Mr. Farebrother,
almost converted by Dorothea's ardor.

"Surely, a woman is bound to be cautious and listen to those who know
the world better than she does."  said Sir James, with his little
frown.  "Whatever you do in the end, Dorothea, you should really keep
back at present, and not volunteer any meddling with this Bulstrode
business.  We don't know yet what may turn up.  You must agree with
me?" he ended, looking at Mr. Farebrother.

"I do think it would be better to wait," said the latter.

"Yes, yes, my dear," said Mr. Brooke, not quite knowing at what point
the discussion had arrived, but coming up to it with a contribution
which was generally appropriate.  "It is easy to go too far, you know.
You must not let your ideas run away with you.  And as to being in a
hurry to put money into schemes--it won't do, you know.  Garth has
drawn me in uncommonly with repairs, draining, that sort of thing: I'm
uncommonly out of pocket with one thing or another.  I must pull up.
As for you, Chettam, you are spending a fortune on those oak fences
round your demesne."

Dorothea, submitting uneasily to this discouragement, went with Celia
into the library, which was her usual drawing-room.

"Now, Dodo, do listen to what James says," said Celia, "else you will
be getting into a scrape.  You always did, and you always will, when
you set about doing as you please.  And I think it is a mercy now after
all that you have got James to think for you.  He lets you have your
plans, only he hinders you from being taken in.  And that is the good
of having a brother instead of a husband.  A husband would not let you
have your plans."

"As if I wanted a husband!" said Dorothea.  "I only want not to have my
feelings checked at every turn."  Mrs. Casaubon was still undisciplined
enough to burst into angry tears.

"Now, really, Dodo," said Celia, with rather a deeper guttural than
usual, "you _are_ contradictory: first one thing and then another.  You
used to submit to Mr. Casaubon quite shamefully: I think you would have
given up ever coming to see me if he had asked you."

"Of course I submitted to him, because it was my duty; it was my
feeling for him," said Dorothea, looking through the prism of her tears.

"Then why can't you think it your duty to submit a little to what James
wishes?" said Celia, with a sense of stringency in her argument.
"Because he only wishes what is for your own good.  And, of course, men
know best about everything, except what women know better." Dorothea
laughed and forgot her tears.

"Well, I mean about babies and those things," explained Celia.  "I
should not give up to James when I knew he was wrong, as you used to do
to Mr. Casaubon."



CHAPTER LXXIII.

    Pity the laden one; this wandering woe
    May visit you and me.


When Lydgate had allayed Mrs. Bulstrode's anxiety by telling her that
her husband had been seized with faintness at the meeting, but that he
trusted soon to see him better and would call again the next day,
unless she sent for him earlier, he went directly home, got on his
horse, and rode three miles out of the town for the sake of being out
of reach.

He felt himself becoming violent and unreasonable as if raging under
the pain of stings: he was ready to curse the day on which he had come
to Middlemarch.  Everything that bad happened to him there seemed a
mere preparation for this hateful fatality, which had come as a blight
on his honorable ambition, and must make even people who had only
vulgar standards regard his reputation as irrevocably damaged.  In such
moments a man can hardly escape being unloving.  Lydgate thought of
himself as the sufferer, and of others as the agents who had injured
his lot.  He had meant everything to turn out differently; and others
had thrust themselves into his life and thwarted his purposes.  His
marriage seemed an unmitigated calamity; and he was afraid of going to
Rosamond before he had vented himself in this solitary rage, lest the
mere sight of her should exasperate him and make him behave
unwarrantably.  There are episodes in most men's lives in which their
highest qualities can only cast a deterring shadow over the objects
that fill their inward vision: Lydgate's tenderheartedness was present
just then only as a dread lest he should offend against it, not as an
emotion that swayed him to tenderness.  For he was very miserable.
Only those who know the supremacy of the intellectual life--the life
which has a seed of ennobling thought and purpose within it--can
understand the grief of one who falls from that serene activity into
the absorbing soul-wasting struggle with worldly annoyances.

How was he to live on without vindicating himself among people who
suspected him of baseness?  How could he go silently away from
Middlemarch as if he were retreating before a just condemnation?  And
yet how was he to set about vindicating himself?

For that scene at the meeting, which he had just witnessed, although it
had told him no particulars, had been enough to make his own situation
thoroughly clear to him.  Bulstrode had been in dread of scandalous
disclosures on the part of Raffles.  Lydgate could now construct all
the probabilities of the case.  "He was afraid of some betrayal in my
hearing: all he wanted was to bind me to him by a strong obligation:
that was why he passed on a sudden from hardness to liberality.  And he
may have tampered with the patient--he may have disobeyed my orders.  I
fear he did.  But whether he did or not, the world believes that he
somehow or other poisoned the man and that I winked at the crime, if I
didn't help in it.  And yet--and yet he may not be guilty of the last
offence; and it is just possible that the change towards me may have
been a genuine relenting--the effect of second thoughts such as he
alleged.  What we call the 'just possible' is sometimes true and the
thing we find it easier to believe is grossly false.  In his last
dealings with this man Bulstrode may have kept his hands pure, in spite
of my suspicion to the contrary."

There was a benumbing cruelty in his position.  Even if he renounced
every other consideration than that of justifying himself--if he met
shrugs, cold glances, and avoidance as an accusation, and made a public
statement of all the facts as he knew them, who would be convinced?  It
would be playing the part of a fool to offer his own testimony on
behalf of himself, and say, "I did not take the money as a bribe."  The
circumstances would always be stronger than his assertion.  And
besides, to come forward and tell everything about himself must include
declarations about Bulstrode which would darken the suspicions of
others against him.  He must tell that he had not known of Raffles's
existence when he first mentioned his pressing need of money to
Bulstrode, and that he took the money innocently as a result of that
communication, not knowing that a new motive for the loan might have
arisen on his being called in to this man.  And after all, the
suspicion of Bulstrode's motives might be unjust.

But then came the question whether he should have acted in precisely
the same way if he had not taken the money?  Certainly, if Raffles had
continued alive and susceptible of further treatment when he arrived,
and he had then imagined any disobedience to his orders on the part of
Bulstrode, he would have made a strict inquiry, and if his conjecture
had been verified he would have thrown up the case, in spite of his
recent heavy obligation.  But if he had not received any money--if
Bulstrode had never revoked his cold recommendation of bankruptcy--would
he, Lydgate, have abstained from all inquiry even on finding the
man dead?--would the shrinking from an insult to Bulstrode--would the
dubiousness of all medical treatment and the argument that his own
treatment would pass for the wrong with most members of his
profession--have had just the same force or significance with him?

That was the uneasy corner of Lydgate's consciousness while he was
reviewing the facts and resisting all reproach.  If he had been
independent, this matter of a patient's treatment and the distinct rule
that he must do or see done that which he believed best for the life
committed to him, would have been the point on which he would have been
the sturdiest.  As it was, he had rested in the consideration that
disobedience to his orders, however it might have arisen, could not be
considered a crime, that in the dominant opinion obedience to his
orders was just as likely to be fatal, and that the affair was simply
one of etiquette.  Whereas, again and again, in his time of freedom, he
had denounced the perversion of pathological doubt into moral doubt and
had said--"the purest experiment in treatment may still be
conscientious: my business is to take care of life, and to do the best
I can think of for it.  Science is properly more scrupulous than dogma.
Dogma gives a charter to mistake, but the very breath of science is a
contest with mistake, and must keep the conscience alive." Alas! the
scientific conscience had got into the debasing company of money
obligation and selfish respects.

"Is there a medical man of them all in Middlemarch who would question
himself as I do?" said poor Lydgate, with a renewed outburst of
rebellion against the oppression of his lot.  "And yet they will all
feel warranted in making a wide space between me and them, as if I were
a leper!  My practice and my reputation are utterly damned--I can see
that.  Even if I could be cleared by valid evidence, it would make
little difference to the blessed world here.  I have been set down as
tainted and should be cheapened to them all the same."

Already there had been abundant signs which had hitherto puzzled him,
that just when he had been paying off his debts and getting cheerfully
on his feet, the townsmen were avoiding him or looking strangely at
him, and in two instances it came to his knowledge that patients of his
had called in another practitioner.  The reasons were too plain now.
The general black-balling had begun.

No wonder that in Lydgate's energetic nature the sense of a hopeless
misconstruction easily turned into a dogged resistance.  The scowl
which occasionally showed itself on his square brow was not a
meaningless accident.  Already when he was re-entering the town after
that ride taken in the first hours of stinging pain, he was setting his
mind on remaining in Middlemarch in spite of the worst that could be
done against him.  He would not retreat before calumny, as if he
submitted to it.  He would face it to the utmost, and no act of his
should show that he was afraid.  It belonged to the generosity as well
as defiant force of his nature that he resolved not to shrink from
showing to the full his sense of obligation to Bulstrode.  It was true
that the association with this man had been fatal to him--true that if
he had had the thousand pounds still in his hands with all his debts
unpaid he would have returned the money to Bulstrode, and taken beggary
rather than the rescue which had been sullied with the suspicion of a
bribe (for, remember, he was one of the proudest among the sons of
men)--nevertheless, he would not turn away from this crushed
fellow-mortal whose aid he had used, and make a pitiful effort to get
acquittal for himself by howling against another.  "I shall do as I
think right, and explain to nobody.  They will try to starve me out,
but--" he was going on with an obstinate resolve, but he was getting
near home, and the thought of Rosamond urged itself again into that
chief place from which it had been thrust by the agonized struggles of
wounded honor and pride.

How would Rosamond take it all?  Here was another weight of chain to
drag, and poor Lydgate was in a bad mood for bearing her dumb mastery.
He had no impulse to tell her the trouble which must soon be common to
them both.  He preferred waiting for the incidental disclosure which
events must soon bring about.



CHAPTER LXXIV.

    "Mercifully grant that we may grow aged together."
                             --BOOK OF TOBIT: Marriage Prayer.


In Middlemarch a wife could not long remain ignorant that the town held
a bad opinion of her husband.  No feminine intimate might carry her
friendship so far as to make a plain statement to the wife of the
unpleasant fact known or believed about her husband; but when a woman
with her thoughts much at leisure got them suddenly employed on
something grievously disadvantageous to her neighbors, various moral
impulses were called into play which tended to stimulate utterance.
Candor was one.  To be candid, in Middlemarch phraseology, meant, to
use an early opportunity of letting your friends know that you did not
take a cheerful view of their capacity, their conduct, or their
position; and a robust candor never waited to be asked for its opinion.
Then, again, there was the love of truth--a wide phrase, but meaning in
this relation, a lively objection to seeing a wife look happier than
her husband's character warranted, or manifest too much satisfaction in
her lot--the poor thing should have some hint given her that if she
knew the truth she would have less complacency in her bonnet, and in
light dishes for a supper-party. Stronger than all, there was the
regard for a friend's moral improvement, sometimes called her soul,
which was likely to be benefited by remarks tending to gloom, uttered
with the accompaniment of pensive staring at the furniture and a manner
implying that the speaker would not tell what was on her mind, from
regard to the feelings of her hearer.  On the whole, one might say that
an ardent charity was at work setting the virtuous mind to make a
neighbor unhappy for her good.

There were hardly any wives in Middlemarch whose matrimonial
misfortunes would in different ways be likely to call forth more of
this moral activity than Rosamond and her aunt Bulstrode.  Mrs.
Bulstrode was not an object of dislike, and had never consciously
injured any human being.  Men had always thought her a handsome
comfortable woman, and had reckoned it among the signs of Bulstrode's
hypocrisy that he had chosen a red-blooded Vincy, instead of a ghastly
and melancholy person suited to his low esteem for earthly pleasure.
When the scandal about her husband was disclosed they remarked of
her--"Ah, poor woman!  She's as honest as the day--_she_ never
suspected anything wrong in him, you may depend on it."  Women, who
were intimate with her, talked together much of "poor Harriet,"
imagined what her feelings must be when she came to know everything,
and conjectured how much she had already come to know.  There was no
spiteful disposition towards her; rather, there was a busy benevolence
anxious to ascertain what it would be well for her to feel and do under
the circumstances, which of course kept the imagination occupied with
her character and history from the times when she was Harriet Vincy
till now.  With the review of Mrs. Bulstrode and her position it was
inevitable to associate Rosamond, whose prospects were under the same
blight with her aunt's. Rosamond was more severely criticised and less
pitied, though she too, as one of the good old Vincy family who had
always been known in Middlemarch, was regarded as a victim to marriage
with an interloper.  The Vincys had their weaknesses, but then they lay
on the surface: there was never anything bad to be "found out"
concerning them.  Mrs. Bulstrode was vindicated from any resemblance to
her husband.  Harriet's faults were her own.

"She has always been showy," said Mrs. Hackbutt, making tea for a small
party, "though she has got into the way of putting her religion
forward, to conform to her husband; she has tried to hold her head up
above Middlemarch by making it known that she invites clergymen and
heaven-knows-who from Riverston and those places."

"We can hardly blame her for that," said Mrs. Sprague; "because few of
the best people in the town cared to associate with Bulstrode, and she
must have somebody to sit down at her table."

"Mr. Thesiger has always countenanced him," said Mrs. Hackbutt.  "I
think he must be sorry now."

"But he was never fond of him in his heart--that every one knows," said
Mrs. Tom Toller.  "Mr. Thesiger never goes into extremes.  He keeps to
the truth in what is evangelical.  It is only clergymen like Mr. Tyke,
who want to use Dissenting hymn-books and that low kind of religion,
who ever found Bulstrode to their taste."

"I understand, Mr. Tyke is in great distress about him," said Mrs.
Hackbutt.  "And well he may be: they say the Bulstrodes have half kept
the Tyke family."

"And of course it is a discredit to his doctrines," said Mrs. Sprague,
who was elderly, and old-fashioned in her opinions.

"People will not make a boast of being methodistical in Middlemarch for
a good while to come."

"I think we must not set down people's bad actions to their religion,"
said falcon-faced Mrs. Plymdale, who had been listening hitherto.

"Oh, my dear, we are forgetting," said Mrs. Sprague.  "We ought not to
be talking of this before you."

"I am sure I have no reason to be partial," said Mrs. Plymdale,
coloring.  "It's true Mr. Plymdale has always been on good terms with
Mr. Bulstrode, and Harriet Vincy was my friend long before she married
him.  But I have always kept my own opinions and told her where she was
wrong, poor thing.  Still, in point of religion, I must say, Mr.
Bulstrode might have done what he has, and worse, and yet have been a
man of no religion.  I don't say that there has not been a little too
much of that--I like moderation myself.  But truth is truth.  The men
tried at the assizes are not all over-religious, I suppose."

"Well," said Mrs. Hackbutt, wheeling adroitly, "all I can say is, that
I think she ought to separate from him."

"I can't say that," said Mrs. Sprague.  "She took him for better or
worse, you know."

"But 'worse' can never mean finding out that your husband is fit for
Newgate," said Mrs. Hackbutt.  "Fancy living with such a man!  I should
expect to be poisoned."

"Yes, I think myself it is an encouragement to crime if such men are to
be taken care of and waited on by good wives," said Mrs. Tom Toller.

"And a good wife poor Harriet has been," said Mrs. Plymdale.  "She
thinks her husband the first of men.  It's true he has never denied her
anything."

"Well, we shall see what she will do," said Mrs. Hackbutt.  "I suppose
she knows nothing yet, poor creature.  I do hope and trust I shall not
see her, for I should be frightened to death lest I should say anything
about her husband.  Do you think any hint has reached her?"

"I should hardly think so," said Mrs. Tom Toller.  "We hear that he is
ill, and has never stirred out of the house since the meeting on
Thursday; but she was with her girls at church yesterday, and they had
new Tuscan bonnets.  Her own had a feather in it.  I have never seen
that her religion made any difference in her dress."

"She wears very neat patterns always," said Mrs. Plymdale, a little
stung.  "And that feather I know she got dyed a pale lavender on
purpose to be consistent.  I must say it of Harriet that she wishes to
do right."

"As to her knowing what has happened, it can't be kept from her long,"
said Mrs. Hackbutt.  "The Vincys know, for Mr. Vincy was at the
meeting.  It will be a great blow to him.  There is his daughter as
well as his sister."

"Yes, indeed," said Mrs. Sprague.  "Nobody supposes that Mr. Lydgate
can go on holding up his head in Middlemarch, things look so black
about the thousand pounds he took just at that man's death.  It really
makes one shudder."

"Pride must have a fall," said Mrs. Hackbutt.

"I am not so sorry for Rosamond Vincy that was as I am for her aunt,"
said Mrs. Plymdale.  "She needed a lesson."

"I suppose the Bulstrodes will go and live abroad somewhere," said Mrs.
Sprague.  "That is what is generally done when there is anything
disgraceful in a family."

"And a most deadly blow it will be to Harriet," said Mrs. Plymdale.
"If ever a woman was crushed, she will be.  I pity her from my heart.
And with all her faults, few women are better.  From a girl she had the
neatest ways, and was always good-hearted, and as open as the day.  You
might look into her drawers when you would--always the same.  And so
she has brought up Kate and Ellen.  You may think how hard it will be
for her to go among foreigners."

"The doctor says that is what he should recommend the Lydgates to do,"
said Mrs. Sprague.  "He says Lydgate ought to have kept among the
French."

"That would suit _her_ well enough, I dare say," said Mrs. Plymdale;
"there is that kind of lightness about her.  But she got that from her
mother; she never got it from her aunt Bulstrode, who always gave her
good advice, and to my knowledge would rather have had her marry
elsewhere."

Mrs. Plymdale was in a situation which caused her some complication of
feeling.  There had been not only her intimacy with Mrs. Bulstrode, but
also a profitable business relation of the great Plymdale dyeing house
with Mr. Bulstrode, which on the one hand would have inclined her to
desire that the mildest view of his character should be the true one,
but on the other, made her the more afraid of seeming to palliate his
culpability.  Again, the late alliance of her family with the Tollers
had brought her in connection with the best circle, which gratified her
in every direction except in the inclination to those serious views
which she believed to be the best in another sense.  The sharp little
woman's conscience was somewhat troubled in the adjustment of these
opposing "bests," and of her griefs and satisfactions under late
events, which were likely to humble those who needed humbling, but also
to fall heavily on her old friend whose faults she would have preferred
seeing on a background of prosperity.

Poor Mrs. Bulstrode, meanwhile, had been no further shaken by the
oncoming tread of calamity than in the busier stirring of that secret
uneasiness which had always been present in her since the last visit of
Raffles to The Shrubs.  That the hateful man had come ill to Stone
Court, and that her husband had chosen to remain there and watch over
him, she allowed to be explained by the fact that Raffles had been
employed and aided in earlier-days, and that this made a tie of
benevolence towards him in his degraded helplessness; and she had been
since then innocently cheered by her husband's more hopeful speech
about his own health and ability to continue his attention to business.
The calm was disturbed when Lydgate had brought him home ill from the
meeting, and in spite of comforting assurances during the next few
days, she cried in private from the conviction that her husband was not
suffering from bodily illness merely, but from something that afflicted
his mind.  He would not allow her to read to him, and scarcely to sit
with him, alleging nervous susceptibility to sounds and movements; yet
she suspected that in shutting himself up in his private room he wanted
to be busy with his papers.  Something, she felt sure, had happened.
Perhaps it was some great loss of money; and she was kept in the dark.
Not daring to question her husband, she said to Lydgate, on the fifth
day after the meeting, when she had not left home except to go to
church--

"Mr. Lydgate, pray be open with me: I like to know the truth.  Has
anything happened to Mr. Bulstrode?"

"Some little nervous shock," said Lydgate, evasively.  He felt that it
was not for him to make the painful revelation.

"But what brought it on?" said Mrs. Bulstrode, looking directly at him
with her large dark eyes.

"There is often something poisonous in the air of public rooms," said
Lydgate.  "Strong men can stand it, but it tells on people in
proportion to the delicacy of their systems.  It is often impossible to
account for the precise moment of an attack--or rather, to say why the
strength gives way at a particular moment."

Mrs. Bulstrode was not satisfied with this answer.  There remained in
her the belief that some calamity had befallen her husband, of which
she was to be kept in ignorance; and it was in her nature strongly to
object to such concealment.  She begged leave for her daughters to sit
with their father, and drove into the town to pay some visits,
conjecturing that if anything were known to have gone wrong in Mr.
Bulstrode's affairs, she should see or hear some sign of it.

She called on Mrs. Thesiger, who was not at home, and then drove to
Mrs. Hackbutt's on the other side of the churchyard.  Mrs. Hackbutt saw
her coming from an up-stairs window, and remembering her former alarm
lest she should meet Mrs. Bulstrode, felt almost bound in consistency
to send word that she was not at home; but against that, there was a
sudden strong desire within her for the excitement of an interview in
which she was quite determined not to make the slightest allusion to
what was in her mind.

Hence Mrs. Bulstrode was shown into the drawing-room, and Mrs. Hackbutt
went to her, with more tightness of lip and rubbing of her hands than
was usually observable in her, these being precautions adopted against
freedom of speech.  She was resolved not to ask how Mr. Bulstrode was.

"I have not been anywhere except to church for nearly a week," said
Mrs. Bulstrode, after a few introductory remarks.  "But Mr. Bulstrode
was taken so ill at the meeting on Thursday that I have not liked to
leave the house."

Mrs. Hackbutt rubbed the back of one hand with the palm of the other
held against her chest, and let her eyes ramble over the pattern on the
rug.

"Was Mr. Hackbutt at the meeting?" persevered Mrs. Bulstrode.

"Yes, he was," said Mrs. Hackbutt, with the same attitude.  "The land
is to be bought by subscription, I believe."

"Let us hope that there will be no more cases of cholera to be buried
in it," said Mrs. Bulstrode.  "It is an awful visitation.  But I always
think Middlemarch a very healthy spot.  I suppose it is being used to
it from a child; but I never saw the town I should like to live at
better, and especially our end."

"I am sure I should be glad that you always should live at Middlemarch,
Mrs. Bulstrode," said Mrs. Hackbutt, with a slight sigh.  "Still, we
must learn to resign ourselves, wherever our lot may be cast.  Though I
am sure there will always be people in this town who will wish you
well."

Mrs. Hackbutt longed to say, "if you take my advice you will part from
your husband," but it seemed clear to her that the poor woman knew
nothing of the thunder ready to bolt on her head, and she herself could
do no more than prepare her a little.  Mrs. Bulstrode felt suddenly
rather chill and trembling: there was evidently something unusual
behind this speech of Mrs. Hackbutt's; but though she had set out with
the desire to be fully informed, she found herself unable now to pursue
her brave purpose, and turning the conversation by an inquiry about the
young Hackbutts, she soon took her leave saying that she was going to
see Mrs. Plymdale.  On her way thither she tried to imagine that there
might have been some unusually warm sparring at the meeting between Mr.
Bulstrode and some of his frequent opponents--perhaps Mr. Hackbutt
might have been one of them.  That would account for everything.

But when she was in conversation with Mrs. Plymdale that comforting
explanation seemed no longer tenable.  "Selina" received her with a
pathetic affectionateness and a disposition to give edifying answers on
the commonest topics, which could hardly have reference to an ordinary
quarrel of which the most important consequence was a perturbation of
Mr. Bulstrode's health.  Beforehand Mrs. Bulstrode had thought that she
would sooner question Mrs. Plymdale than any one else; but she found to
her surprise that an old friend is not always the person whom it is
easiest to make a confidant of: there was the barrier of remembered
communication under other circumstances--there was the dislike of
being pitied and informed by one who had been long wont to allow her
the superiority.  For certain words of mysterious appropriateness that
Mrs. Plymdale let fall about her resolution never to turn her back on
her friends, convinced Mrs. Bulstrode that what had happened must be
some kind of misfortune, and instead of being able to say with her
native directness, "What is it that you have in your mind?" she found
herself anxious to get away before she had heard anything more
explicit.  She began to have an agitating certainty that the misfortune
was something more than the mere loss of money, being keenly sensitive
to the fact that Selina now, just as Mrs. Hackbutt had done before,
avoided noticing what she said about her husband, as they would have
avoided noticing a personal blemish.

She said good-by with nervous haste, and told the coachman to drive to
Mr. Vincy's warehouse.  In that short drive her dread gathered so much
force from the sense of darkness, that when she entered the private
counting-house where her brother sat at his desk, her knees trembled
and her usually florid face was deathly pale.  Something of the same
effect was produced in him by the sight of her: he rose from his seat
to meet her, took her by the hand, and said, with his impulsive
rashness--

"God help you, Harriet! you know all."

That moment was perhaps worse than any which came after.  It contained
that concentrated experience which in great crises of emotion reveals
the bias of a nature, and is prophetic of the ultimate act which will
end an intermediate struggle.  Without that memory of Raffles she might
still have thought only of monetary ruin, but now along with her
brother's look and words there darted into her mind the idea of some
guilt in her husband--then, under the working of terror came the image
of her husband exposed to disgrace--and then, after an instant of
scorching shame in which she felt only the eyes of the world, with one
leap of her heart she was at his side in mournful but unreproaching
fellowship with shame and isolation.  All this went on within her in a
mere flash of time--while she sank into the chair, and raised her eyes
to her brother, who stood over her.  "I know nothing, Walter.  What is
it?" she said, faintly.

He told her everything, very inartificially, in slow fragments, making
her aware that the scandal went much beyond proof, especially as to the
end of Raffles.

"People will talk," he said.  "Even if a man has been acquitted by a
jury, they'll talk, and nod and wink--and as far as the world goes, a
man might often as well be guilty as not.  It's a breakdown blow, and
it damages Lydgate as much as Bulstrode.  I don't pretend to say what
is the truth.  I only wish we had never heard the name of either
Bulstrode or Lydgate.  You'd better have been a Vincy all your life,
and so had Rosamond."  Mrs. Bulstrode made no reply.

"But you must bear up as well as you can, Harriet.  People don't blame
_you_. And I'll stand by you whatever you make up your mind to do,"
said the brother, with rough but well-meaning affectionateness.

"Give me your arm to the carriage, Walter," said Mrs. Bulstrode.  "I
feel very weak."

And when she got home she was obliged to say to her daughter, "I am not
well, my dear; I must go and lie down.  Attend to your papa.  Leave me
in quiet.  I shall take no dinner."

She locked herself in her room.  She needed time to get used to her
maimed consciousness, her poor lopped life, before she could walk
steadily to the place allotted her.  A new searching light had fallen
on her husband's character, and she could not judge him leniently: the
twenty years in which she had believed in him and venerated him by
virtue of his concealments came back with particulars that made them
seem an odious deceit.  He had married her with that bad past life
hidden behind him, and she had no faith left to protest his innocence
of the worst that was imputed to him.  Her honest ostentatious nature
made the sharing of a merited dishonor as bitter as it could be to any
mortal.

But this imperfectly taught woman, whose phrases and habits were an odd
patchwork, had a loyal spirit within her.  The man whose prosperity she
had shared through nearly half a life, and who had unvaryingly
cherished her--now that punishment had befallen him it was not possible
to her in any sense to forsake him.  There is a forsaking which still
sits at the same board and lies on the same couch with the forsaken
soul, withering it the more by unloving proximity.  She knew, when she
locked her door, that she should unlock it ready to go down to her
unhappy husband and espouse his sorrow, and say of his guilt, I will
mourn and not reproach.  But she needed time to gather up her strength;
she needed to sob out her farewell to all the gladness and pride of her
life.  When she had resolved to go down, she prepared herself by some
little acts which might seem mere folly to a hard onlooker; they were
her way of expressing to all spectators visible or invisible that she
had begun a new life in which she embraced humiliation.  She took off
all her ornaments and put on a plain black gown, and instead of wearing
her much-adorned cap and large bows of hair, she brushed her hair down
and put on a plain bonnet-cap, which made her look suddenly like an
early Methodist.

Bulstrode, who knew that his wife had been out and had come in saying
that she was not well, had spent the time in an agitation equal to
hers.  He had looked forward to her learning the truth from others, and
had acquiesced in that probability, as something easier to him than any
confession.  But now that he imagined the moment of her knowledge come,
he awaited the result in anguish.  His daughters had been obliged to
consent to leave him, and though he had allowed some food to be brought
to him, he had not touched it.  He felt himself perishing slowly in
unpitied misery.  Perhaps he should never see his wife's face with
affection in it again.  And if he turned to God there seemed to be no
answer but the pressure of retribution.

It was eight o'clock in the evening before the door opened and his wife
entered.  He dared not look up at her.  He sat with his eyes bent down,
and as she went towards him she thought he looked smaller--he seemed
so withered and shrunken.  A movement of new compassion and old
tenderness went through her like a great wave, and putting one hand on
his which rested on the arm of the chair, and the other on his
shoulder, she said, solemnly but kindly--

"Look up, Nicholas."

He raised his eyes with a little start and looked at her half amazed
for a moment: her pale face, her changed, mourning dress, the trembling
about her mouth, all said, "I know;" and her hands and eyes rested
gently on him.  He burst out crying and they cried together, she
sitting at his side.  They could not yet speak to each other of the
shame which she was bearing with him, or of the acts which had brought
it down on them.  His confession was silent, and her promise of
faithfulness was silent.  Open-minded as she was, she nevertheless
shrank from the words which would have expressed their mutual
consciousness, as she would have shrunk from flakes of fire.  She could
not say, "How much is only slander and false suspicion?" and he did not
say, "I am innocent."



CHAPTER LXXV.

    "Le sentiment de la faussete des plaisirs presents, et
    l'ignorance de la vanite des plaisirs absents causent
    l'inconstance."--PASCAL.


Rosamond had a gleam of returning cheerfulness when the house was freed
from the threatening figure, and when all the disagreeable creditors
were paid.  But she was not joyous: her married life had fulfilled none
of her hopes, and had been quite spoiled for her imagination.  In this
brief interval of calm, Lydgate, remembering that he had often been
stormy in his hours of perturbation, and mindful of the pain Rosamond
had had to bear, was carefully gentle towards her; but he, too, had
lost some of his old spirit, and he still felt it necessary to refer to
an economical change in their way of living as a matter of course,
trying to reconcile her to it gradually, and repressing his anger when
she answered by wishing that he would go to live in London.  When she
did not make this answer, she listened languidly, and wondered what she
had that was worth living for.  The hard and contemptuous words which
had fallen from her husband in his anger had deeply offended that
vanity which he had at first called into active enjoyment; and what she
regarded as his perverse way of looking at things, kept up a secret
repulsion, which made her receive all his tenderness as a poor
substitute for the happiness he had failed to give her.  They were at a
disadvantage with their neighbors, and there was no longer any outlook
towards Quallingham--there was no outlook anywhere except in an
occasional letter from Will Ladislaw.  She had felt stung and
disappointed by Will's resolution to quit Middlemarch, for in spite of
what she knew and guessed about his admiration for Dorothea, she
secretly cherished the belief that he had, or would necessarily come to
have, much more admiration for herself; Rosamond being one of those
women who live much in the idea that each man they meet would have
preferred them if the preference had not been hopeless.  Mrs. Casaubon
was all very well; but Will's interest in her dated before he knew Mrs.
Lydgate.  Rosamond took his way of talking to herself, which was a
mixture of playful fault-finding and hyperbolical gallantry, as the
disguise of a deeper feeling; and in his presence she felt that
agreeable titillation of vanity and sense of romantic drama which
Lydgate's presence had no longer the magic to create.  She even
fancied--what will not men and women fancy in these matters?--that
Will exaggerated his admiration for Mrs. Casaubon in order to pique
herself.  In this way poor Rosamond's brain had been busy before Will's
departure.  He would have made, she thought, a much more suitable
husband for her than she had found in Lydgate.  No notion could have
been falser than this, for Rosamond's discontent in her marriage was
due to the conditions of marriage itself, to its demand for
self-suppression and tolerance, and not to the nature of her husband;
but the easy conception of an unreal Better had a sentimental charm
which diverted her ennui.  She constructed a little romance which was
to vary the flatness of her life: Will Ladislaw was always to be a
bachelor and live near her, always to be at her command, and have an
understood though never fully expressed passion for her, which would be
sending out lambent flames every now and then in interesting scenes.
His departure had been a proportionate disappointment, and had sadly
increased her weariness of Middlemarch; but at first she had the
alternative dream of pleasures in store from her intercourse with the
family at Quallingham.  Since then the troubles of her married life had
deepened, and the absence of other relief encouraged her regretful
rumination over that thin romance which she had once fed on.  Men and
women make sad mistakes about their own symptoms, taking their vague
uneasy longings, sometimes for genius, sometimes for religion, and
oftener still for a mighty love.  Will Ladislaw had written chatty
letters, half to her and half to Lydgate, and she had replied: their
separation, she felt, was not likely to be final, and the change she
now most longed for was that Lydgate should go to live in London;
everything would be agreeable in London; and she had set to work with
quiet determination to win this result, when there came a sudden,
delightful promise which inspirited her.

It came shortly before the memorable meeting at the town-hall, and was
nothing less than a letter from Will Ladislaw to Lydgate, which turned
indeed chiefly on his new interest in plans of colonization, but
mentioned incidentally, that he might find it necessary to pay a visit
to Middlemarch within the next few weeks--a very pleasant necessity, he
said, almost as good as holidays to a schoolboy.  He hoped there was
his old place on the rug, and a great deal of music in store for him.
But he was quite uncertain as to the time.  While Lydgate was reading
the letter to Rosamond, her face looked like a reviving flower--it grew
prettier and more blooming.  There was nothing unendurable now: the
debts were paid, Mr. Ladislaw was coming, and Lydgate would be
persuaded to leave Middlemarch and settle in London, which was "so
different from a provincial town."

That was a bright bit of morning.  But soon the sky became black over
poor Rosamond.  The presence of a new gloom in her husband, about which
he was entirely reserved towards her--for he dreaded to expose his
lacerated feeling to her neutrality and misconception--soon received a
painfully strange explanation, alien to all her previous notions of
what could affect her happiness.  In the new gayety of her spirits,
thinking that Lydgate had merely a worse fit of moodiness than usual,
causing him to leave her remarks unanswered, and evidently to keep out
of her way as much as possible, she chose, a few days after the
meeting, and without speaking to him on the subject, to send out notes
of invitation for a small evening party, feeling convinced that this
was a judicious step, since people seemed to have been keeping aloof
from them, and wanted restoring to the old habit of intercourse.  When
the invitations had been accepted, she would tell Lydgate, and give him
a wise admonition as to how a medical man should behave to his
neighbors; for Rosamond had the gravest little airs possible about
other people's duties.  But all the invitations were declined, and the
last answer came into Lydgate's hands.

"This is Chichely's scratch.  What is he writing to you about?" said
Lydgate, wonderingly, as he handed the note to her.  She was obliged to
let him see it, and, looking at her severely, he said--

"Why on earth have you been sending out invitations without telling me,
Rosamond?  I beg, I insist that you will not invite any one to this
house.  I suppose you have been inviting others, and they have refused
too."  She said nothing.

"Do you hear me?" thundered Lydgate.

"Yes, certainly I hear you," said Rosamond, turning her head aside with
the movement of a graceful long-necked bird.

Lydgate tossed his head without any grace and walked out of the room,
feeling himself dangerous.  Rosamond's thought was, that he was getting
more and more unbearable--not that there was any new special reason for
this peremptoriness.  His indisposition to tell her anything in which
he was sure beforehand that she would not be interested was growing
into an unreflecting habit, and she was in ignorance of everything
connected with the thousand pounds except that the loan had come from
her uncle Bulstrode.  Lydgate's odious humors and their neighbors'
apparent avoidance of them had an unaccountable date for her in their
relief from money difficulties.  If the invitations had been accepted
she would have gone to invite her mamma and the rest, whom she had seen
nothing of for several days; and she now put on her bonnet to go and
inquire what had become of them all, suddenly feeling as if there were
a conspiracy to leave her in isolation with a husband disposed to
offend everybody.  It was after the dinner hour, and she found her
father and mother seated together alone in the drawing-room. They
greeted her with sad looks, saying "Well, my dear!" and no more.  She
had never seen her father look so downcast; and seating herself near
him she said--

"Is there anything the matter, papa?"

He did not answer, but Mrs. Vincy said, "Oh, my dear, have you heard
nothing?  It won't be long before it reaches you."

"Is it anything about Tertius?" said Rosamond, turning pale.  The idea
of trouble immediately connected itself with what had been
unaccountable to her in him.

"Oh, my dear, yes.  To think of your marrying into this trouble.  Debt
was bad enough, but this will be worse."

"Stay, stay, Lucy," said Mr. Vincy.  "Have you heard nothing about your
uncle Bulstrode, Rosamond?"

"No, papa," said the poor thing, feeling as if trouble were not
anything she had before experienced, but some invisible power with an
iron grasp that made her soul faint within her.

Her father told her everything, saying at the end, "It's better for you
to know, my dear.  I think Lydgate must leave the town.  Things have
gone against him.  I dare say he couldn't help it.  I don't accuse him
of any harm," said Mr. Vincy.  He had always before been disposed to
find the utmost fault with Lydgate.

The shock to Rosamond was terrible.  It seemed to her that no lot could
be so cruelly hard as hers to have married a man who had become the
centre of infamous suspicions.  In many cases it is inevitable that the
shame is felt to be the worst part of crime; and it would have required
a great deal of disentangling reflection, such as had never entered
into Rosamond's life, for her in these moments to feel that her trouble
was less than if her husband had been certainly known to have done
something criminal.  All the shame seemed to be there.  And she had
innocently married this man with the belief that he and his family were
a glory to her!  She showed her usual reticence to her parents, and
only said, that if Lydgate had done as she wished he would have left
Middlemarch long ago.

"She bears it beyond anything," said her mother when she was gone.

"Ah, thank God!" said Mr. Vincy, who was much broken down.

But Rosamond went home with a sense of justified repugnance towards her
husband.  What had he really done--how had he really acted?  She did
not know.  Why had he not told her everything?  He did not speak to her
on the subject, and of course she could not speak to him.  It came into
her mind once that she would ask her father to let her go home again;
but dwelling on that prospect made it seem utter dreariness to her: a
married woman gone back to live with her parents--life seemed to have
no meaning for her in such a position: she could not contemplate
herself in it.

The next two days Lydgate observed a change in her, and believed that
she had heard the bad news.  Would she speak to him about it, or would
she go on forever in the silence which seemed to imply that she
believed him guilty?  We must remember that he was in a morbid state of
mind, in which almost all contact was pain.  Certainly Rosamond in this
case had equal reason to complain of reserve and want of confidence on
his part; but in the bitterness of his soul he excused himself;--was
he not justified in shrinking from the task of telling her, since now
she knew the truth she had no impulse to speak to him?  But a
deeper-lying consciousness that he was in fault made him restless, and
the silence between them became intolerable to him; it was as if they
were both adrift on one piece of wreck and looked away from each other.

He thought, "I am a fool.  Haven't I given up expecting anything?  I
have married care, not help."  And that evening he said--

"Rosamond, have you heard anything that distresses you?"

"Yes," she answered, laying down her work, which she had been carrying
on with a languid semi-consciousness, most unlike her usual self.

"What have you heard?"

"Everything, I suppose.  Papa told me."

"That people think me disgraced?"

"Yes," said Rosamond, faintly, beginning to sew again automatically.

There was silence.  Lydgate thought, "If she has any trust in me--any
notion of what I am, she ought to speak now and say that she does not
believe I have deserved disgrace."

But Rosamond on her side went on moving her fingers languidly.
Whatever was to be said on the subject she expected to come from
Tertius.  What did she know?  And if he were innocent of any wrong, why
did he not do something to clear himself?

This silence of hers brought a new rush of gall to that bitter mood in
which Lydgate had been saying to himself that nobody believed in
him--even Farebrother had not come forward.  He had begun to question
her with the intent that their conversation should disperse the chill
fog which had gathered between them, but he felt his resolution checked
by despairing resentment.  Even this trouble, like the rest, she seemed
to regard as if it were hers alone.  He was always to her a being
apart, doing what she objected to.  He started from his chair with an
angry impulse, and thrusting his hands in his pockets, walked up and
down the room.  There was an underlying consciousness all the while
that he should have to master this anger, and tell her everything, and
convince her of the facts.  For he had almost learned the lesson that
he must bend himself to her nature, and that because she came short in
her sympathy, he must give the more.  Soon he recurred to his intention
of opening himself: the occasion must not be lost.  If he could bring
her to feel with some solemnity that here was a slander which must be
met and not run away from, and that the whole trouble had come out of
his desperate want of money, it would be a moment for urging powerfully
on her that they should be one in the resolve to do with as little
money as possible, so that they might weather the bad time and keep
themselves independent.  He would mention the definite measures which
he desired to take, and win her to a willing spirit.  He was bound to
try this--and what else was there for him to do?

He did not know how long he had been walking uneasily backwards and
forwards, but Rosamond felt that it was long, and wished that he would
sit down.  She too had begun to think this an opportunity for urging on
Tertius what he ought to do.  Whatever might be the truth about all
this misery, there was one dread which asserted itself.

Lydgate at last seated himself, not in his usual chair, but in one
nearer to Rosamond, leaning aside in it towards her, and looking at her
gravely before he reopened the sad subject.  He had conquered himself
so far, and was about to speak with a sense of solemnity, as on an
occasion which was not to be repeated.  He had even opened his lips,
when Rosamond, letting her hands fall, looked at him and said--

"Surely, Tertius--"

"Well?"

"Surely now at last you have given up the idea of staying in
Middlemarch.  I cannot go on living here.  Let us go to London.  Papa,
and every one else, says you had better go.  Whatever misery I have to
put up with, it will be easier away from here."

Lydgate felt miserably jarred.  Instead of that critical outpouring for
which he had prepared himself with effort, here was the old round to be
gone through again.  He could not bear it.  With a quick change of
countenance he rose and went out of the room.

Perhaps if he had been strong enough to persist in his determination to
be the more because she was less, that evening might have had a better
issue.  If his energy could have borne down that check, he might still
have wrought on Rosamond's vision and will.  We cannot be sure that any
natures, however inflexible or peculiar, will resist this effect from a
more massive being than their own.  They may be taken by storm and for
the moment converted, becoming part of the soul which enwraps them in
the ardor of its movement.  But poor Lydgate had a throbbing pain
within him, and his energy had fallen short of its task.

The beginning of mutual understanding and resolve seemed as far off as
ever; nay, it seemed blocked out by the sense of unsuccessful effort.
They lived on from day to day with their thoughts still apart, Lydgate
going about what work he had in a mood of despair, and Rosamond
feeling, with some justification, that he was behaving cruelly.  It was
of no use to say anything to Tertius; but when Will Ladislaw came, she
was determined to tell him everything.  In spite of her general
reticence, she needed some one who would recognize her wrongs.



CHAPTER LXXVI.

    "To mercy, pity, peace, and love
         All pray in their distress,
     And to these virtues of delight,
         Return their thankfulness.
           .   .   .   .   .   .
     For Mercy has a human heart,
         Pity a human face;
     And Love, the human form divine;
         And Peace, the human dress.
                       --WILLIAM BLAKE: Songs of Innocence.


Some days later, Lydgate was riding to Lowick Manor, in consequence of
a summons from Dorothea.  The summons had not been unexpected, since it
had followed a letter from Mr. Bulstrode, in which he stated that he
had resumed his arrangements for quitting Middlemarch, and must remind
Lydgate of his previous communications about the Hospital, to the
purport of which he still adhered.  It had been his duty, before taking
further steps, to reopen the subject with Mrs. Casaubon, who now
wished, as before, to discuss the question with Lydgate.  "Your views
may possibly have undergone some change," wrote Mr. Bulstrode; "but, in
that case also, it is desirable that you should lay them before her."

Dorothea awaited his arrival with eager interest.  Though, in deference
to her masculine advisers, she had refrained from what Sir James had
called "interfering in this Bulstrode business," the hardship of
Lydgate's position was continually in her mind, and when Bulstrode
applied to her again about the hospital, she felt that the opportunity
was come to her which she had been hindered from hastening.  In her
luxurious home, wandering under the boughs of her own great trees, her
thought was going out over the lot of others, and her emotions were
imprisoned.  The idea of some active good within her reach, "haunted
her like a passion," and another's need having once come to her as a
distinct image, preoccupied her desire with the yearning to give
relief, and made her own ease tasteless.  She was full of confident
hope about this interview with Lydgate, never heeding what was said of
his personal reserve; never heeding that she was a very young woman.
Nothing could have seemed more irrelevant to Dorothea than insistence
on her youth and sex when she was moved to show her human fellowship.

As she sat waiting in the library, she could do nothing but live
through again all the past scenes which had brought Lydgate into her
memories.  They all owed their significance to her marriage and its
troubles--but no; there were two occasions in which the image of
Lydgate had come painfully in connection with his wife and some one
else.  The pain had been allayed for Dorothea, but it had left in her
an awakened conjecture as to what Lydgate's marriage might be to him, a
susceptibility to the slightest hint about Mrs. Lydgate.  These
thoughts were like a drama to her, and made her eyes bright, and gave
an attitude of suspense to her whole frame, though she was only looking
out from the brown library on to the turf and the bright green buds
which stood in relief against the dark evergreens.

When Lydgate came in, she was almost shocked at the change in his face,
which was strikingly perceptible to her who had not seen him for two
months.  It was not the change of emaciation, but that effect which
even young faces will very soon show from the persistent presence of
resentment and despondency.  Her cordial look, when she put out her
hand to him, softened his expression, but only with melancholy.

"I have wished very much to see you for a long while, Mr. Lydgate,"
said Dorothea when they were seated opposite each other; "but I put off
asking you to come until Mr. Bulstrode applied to me again about the
Hospital.  I know that the advantage of keeping the management of it
separate from that of the Infirmary depends on you, or, at least, on
the good which you are encouraged to hope for from having it under your
control.  And I am sure you will not refuse to tell me exactly what you
think."

"You want to decide whether you should give a generous support to the
Hospital," said Lydgate.  "I cannot conscientiously advise you to do it
in dependence on any activity of mine.  I may be obliged to leave the
town."

He spoke curtly, feeling the ache of despair as to his being able to
carry out any purpose that Rosamond had set her mind against.

"Not because there is no one to believe in you?" said Dorothea, pouring
out her words in clearness from a full heart.  "I know the unhappy
mistakes about you.  I knew them from the first moment to be mistakes.
You have never done anything vile.  You would not do anything
dishonorable."

It was the first assurance of belief in him that had fallen on
Lydgate's ears.  He drew a deep breath, and said, "Thank you." He could
say no more: it was something very new and strange in his life that
these few words of trust from a woman should be so much to him.

"I beseech you to tell me how everything was," said Dorothea,
fearlessly.  "I am sure that the truth would clear you."

Lydgate started up from his chair and went towards the window,
forgetting where he was.  He had so often gone over in his mind the
possibility of explaining everything without aggravating appearances
that would tell, perhaps unfairly, against Bulstrode, and had so often
decided against it--he had so often said to himself that his assertions
would not change people's impressions--that Dorothea's words sounded
like a temptation to do something which in his soberness he had
pronounced to be unreasonable.

"Tell me, pray," said Dorothea, with simple earnestness; "then we can
consult together.  It is wicked to let people think evil of any one
falsely, when it can be hindered."

Lydgate turned, remembering where he was, and saw Dorothea's face
looking up at him with a sweet trustful gravity.  The presence of a
noble nature, generous in its wishes, ardent in its charity, changes
the lights for us: we begin to see things again in their larger,
quieter masses, and to believe that we too can be seen and judged in
the wholeness of our character.  That influence was beginning to act on
Lydgate, who had for many days been seeing all life as one who is
dragged and struggling amid the throng.  He sat down again, and felt
that he was recovering his old self in the consciousness that he was
with one who believed in it.

"I don't want," he said, "to bear hard on Bulstrode, who has lent me
money of which I was in need--though I would rather have gone without
it now.  He is hunted down and miserable, and has only a poor thread of
life in him.  But I should like to tell you everything.  It will be a
comfort to me to speak where belief has gone beforehand, and where I
shall not seem to be offering assertions of my own honesty.  You will
feel what is fair to another, as you feel what is fair to me."

"Do trust me," said Dorothea; "I will not repeat anything without your
leave.  But at the very least, I could say that you have made all the
circumstances clear to me, and that I know you are not in any way
guilty.  Mr. Farebrother would believe me, and my uncle, and Sir James
Chettam.  Nay, there are persons in Middlemarch to whom I could go;
although they don't know much of me, they would believe me.  They would
know that I could have no other motive than truth and justice.  I would
take any pains to clear you.  I have very little to do.  There is
nothing better that I can do in the world."

Dorothea's voice, as she made this childlike picture of what she would
do, might have been almost taken as a proof that she could do it
effectively.  The searching tenderness of her woman's tones seemed made
for a defence against ready accusers.  Lydgate did not stay to think
that she was Quixotic: he gave himself up, for the first time in his
life, to the exquisite sense of leaning entirely on a generous
sympathy, without any check of proud reserve.  And he told her
everything, from the time when, under the pressure of his difficulties,
he unwillingly made his first application to Bulstrode; gradually, in
the relief of speaking, getting into a more thorough utterance of what
had gone on in his mind--entering fully into the fact that his
treatment of the patient was opposed to the dominant practice, into his
doubts at the last, his ideal of medical duty, and his uneasy
consciousness that the acceptance of the money had made some difference
in his private inclination and professional behavior, though not in his
fulfilment of any publicly recognized obligation.

"It has come to my knowledge since," he added, "that Hawley sent some
one to examine the housekeeper at Stone Court, and she said that she
gave the patient all the opium in the phial I left, as well as a good
deal of brandy.  But that would not have been opposed to ordinary
prescriptions, even of first-rate men.  The suspicions against me had
no hold there: they are grounded on the knowledge that I took money,
that Bulstrode had strong motives for wishing the man to die, and that
he gave me the money as a bribe to concur in some malpractices or other
against the patient--that in any case I accepted a bribe to hold my
tongue.  They are just the suspicions that cling the most obstinately,
because they lie in people's inclination and can never be disproved.
How my orders came to be disobeyed is a question to which I don't know
the answer.  It is still possible that Bulstrode was innocent of any
criminal intention--even possible that he had nothing to do with the
disobedience, and merely abstained from mentioning it.  But all that
has nothing to do with the public belief.  It is one of those cases on
which a man is condemned on the ground of his character--it is
believed that he has committed a crime in some undefined way, because
he had the motive for doing it; and Bulstrode's character has enveloped
me, because I took his money.  I am simply blighted--like a damaged
ear of corn--the business is done and can't be undone."

"Oh, it is hard!" said Dorothea.  "I understand the difficulty there is
in your vindicating yourself.  And that all this should have come to
you who had meant to lead a higher life than the common, and to find
out better ways--I cannot bear to rest in this as unchangeable.  I know
you meant that.  I remember what you said to me when you first spoke to
me about the hospital.  There is no sorrow I have thought more about
than that--to love what is great, and try to reach it, and yet to fail."

"Yes," said Lydgate, feeling that here he had found room for the full
meaning of his grief.  "I had some ambition.  I meant everything to be
different with me.  I thought I had more strength and mastery.  But the
most terrible obstacles are such as nobody can see except oneself."

"Suppose," said Dorothea, meditatively,--"suppose we kept on the
Hospital according to the present plan, and you stayed here though only
with the friendship and support of a few, the evil feeling towards you
would gradually die out; there would come opportunities in which people
would be forced to acknowledge that they had been unjust to you,
because they would see that your purposes were pure.  You may still win
a great fame like the Louis and Laennec I have heard you speak of, and
we shall all be proud of you," she ended, with a smile.

"That might do if I had my old trust in myself," said Lydgate,
mournfully.  "Nothing galls me more than the notion of turning round
and running away before this slander, leaving it unchecked behind me.
Still, I can't ask any one to put a great deal of money into a plan
which depends on me."

"It would be quite worth my while," said Dorothea, simply.  "Only
think.  I am very uncomfortable with my money, because they tell me I
have too little for any great scheme of the sort I like best, and yet I
have too much.  I don't know what to do.  I have seven hundred a-year
of my own fortune, and nineteen hundred a-year that Mr. Casaubon left
me, and between three and four thousand of ready money in the bank.  I
wished to raise money and pay it off gradually out of my income which I
don't want, to buy land with and found a village which should be a
school of industry; but Sir James and my uncle have convinced me that
the risk would be too great.  So you see that what I should most
rejoice at would be to have something good to do with my money: I
should like it to make other people's lives better to them.  It makes
me very uneasy--coming all to me who don't want it."

A smile broke through the gloom of Lydgate's face.  The childlike
grave-eyed earnestness with which Dorothea said all this was
irresistible--blent into an adorable whole with her ready understanding
of high experience.  (Of lower experience such as plays a great part in
the world, poor Mrs. Casaubon had a very blurred shortsighted
knowledge, little helped by her imagination.) But she took the smile as
encouragement of her plan.

"I think you see now that you spoke too scrupulously," she said, in a
tone of persuasion.  "The hospital would be one good; and making your
life quite whole and well again would be another."

Lydgate's smile had died away.  "You have the goodness as well as the
money to do all that; if it could be done," he said.  "But--"

He hesitated a little while, looking vaguely towards the window; and
she sat in silent expectation.  At last he turned towards her and said
impetuously--

"Why should I not tell you?--you know what sort of bond marriage is.
You will understand everything."

Dorothea felt her heart beginning to beat faster.  Had he that sorrow
too?  But she feared to say any word, and he went on immediately.

"It is impossible for me now to do anything--to take any step without
considering my wife's happiness.  The thing that I might like to do if
I were alone, is become impossible to me.  I can't see her miserable.
She married me without knowing what she was going into, and it might
have been better for her if she had not married me."

"I know, I know--you could not give her pain, if you were not obliged
to do it," said Dorothea, with keen memory of her own life.

"And she has set her mind against staying.  She wishes to go.  The
troubles she has had here have wearied her," said Lydgate, breaking off
again, lest he should say too much.

"But when she saw the good that might come of staying--" said Dorothea,
remonstrantly, looking at Lydgate as if he had forgotten the reasons
which had just been considered.  He did not speak immediately.

"She would not see it," he said at last, curtly, feeling at first that
this statement must do without explanation.  "And, indeed, I have lost
all spirit about carrying on my life here."  He paused a moment and
then, following the impulse to let Dorothea see deeper into the
difficulty of his life, he said, "The fact is, this trouble has come
upon her confusedly.  We have not been able to speak to each other
about it.  I am not sure what is in her mind about it: she may fear
that I have really done something base.  It is my fault; I ought to be
more open.  But I have been suffering cruelly."

"May I go and see her?" said Dorothea, eagerly.  "Would she accept my
sympathy?  I would tell her that you have not been blamable before any
one's judgment but your own.  I would tell her that you shall be
cleared in every fair mind.  I would cheer her heart.  Will you ask her
if I may go to see her?  I did see her once."

"I am sure you may," said Lydgate, seizing the proposition with some
hope.  "She would feel honored--cheered, I think, by the proof that you
at least have some respect for me.  I will not speak to her about your
coming--that she may not connect it with my wishes at all.  I know very
well that I ought not to have left anything to be told her by others,
but--"

He broke off, and there was a moment's silence.  Dorothea refrained
from saying what was in her mind--how well she knew that there might be
invisible barriers to speech between husband and wife.  This was a
point on which even sympathy might make a wound.  She returned to the
more outward aspect of Lydgate's position, saying cheerfully--

"And if Mrs. Lydgate knew that there were friends who would believe in
you and support you, she might then be glad that you should stay in
your place and recover your hopes--and do what you meant to do.
Perhaps then you would see that it was right to agree with what I
proposed about your continuing at the Hospital.  Surely you would, if
you still have faith in it as a means of making your knowledge useful?"

Lydgate did not answer, and she saw that he was debating with himself.

"You need not decide immediately," she said, gently.  "A few days hence
it will be early enough for me to send my answer to Mr. Bulstrode."

Lydgate still waited, but at last turned to speak in his most decisive
tones.

"No; I prefer that there should be no interval left for wavering.  I am
no longer sure enough of myself--I mean of what it would be possible
for me to do under the changed circumstances of my life.  It would be
dishonorable to let others engage themselves to anything serious in
dependence on me.  I might be obliged to go away after all; I see
little chance of anything else.  The whole thing is too problematic; I
cannot consent to be the cause of your goodness being wasted.  No--let
the new Hospital be joined with the old Infirmary, and everything go on
as it might have done if I had never come.  I have kept a valuable
register since I have been there; I shall send it to a man who will
make use of it," he ended bitterly.  "I can think of nothing for a long
while but getting an income."

"It hurts me very much to hear you speak so hopelessly," said Dorothea.
"It would be a happiness to your friends, who believe in your future,
in your power to do great things, if you would let them save you from
that.  Think how much money I have; it would be like taking a burthen
from me if you took some of it every year till you got free from this
fettering want of income.  Why should not people do these things?  It
is so difficult to make shares at all even.  This is one way."

"God bless you, Mrs. Casaubon!" said Lydgate, rising as if with the
same impulse that made his words energetic, and resting his arm on the
back of the great leather chair he had been sitting in.  "It is good
that you should have such feelings.  But I am not the man who ought to
allow himself to benefit by them.  I have not given guarantees enough.
I must not at least sink into the degradation of being pensioned for
work that I never achieved.  It is very clear to me that I must not
count on anything else than getting away from Middlemarch as soon as I
can manage it.  I should not be able for a long while, at the very
best, to get an income here, and--and it is easier to make necessary
changes in a new place.  I must do as other men do, and think what will
please the world and bring in money; look for a little opening in the
London crowd, and push myself; set up in a watering-place, or go to
some southern town where there are plenty of idle English, and get
myself puffed,--that is the sort of shell I must creep into and try to
keep my soul alive in."

"Now that is not brave," said Dorothea,--"to give up the fight."

"No, it is not brave," said Lydgate, "but if a man is afraid of
creeping paralysis?"  Then, in another tone, "Yet you have made a great
difference in my courage by believing in me.  Everything seems more
bearable since I have talked to you; and if you can clear me in a few
other minds, especially in Farebrother's, I shall be deeply grateful.
The point I wish you not to mention is the fact of disobedience to my
orders.  That would soon get distorted.  After all, there is no
evidence for me but people's opinion of me beforehand.  You can only
repeat my own report of myself."

"Mr. Farebrother will believe--others will believe," said Dorothea.  "I
can say of you what will make it stupidity to suppose that you would be
bribed to do a wickedness."

"I don't know," said Lydgate, with something like a groan in his voice.
"I have not taken a bribe yet.  But there is a pale shade of bribery
which is sometimes called prosperity.  You will do me another great
kindness, then, and come to see my wife?"

"Yes, I will.  I remember how pretty she is," said Dorothea, into whose
mind every impression about Rosamond had cut deep.  "I hope she will
like me."

As Lydgate rode away, he thought, "This young creature has a heart
large enough for the Virgin Mary.  She evidently thinks nothing of her
own future, and would pledge away half her income at once, as if she
wanted nothing for herself but a chair to sit in from which she can
look down with those clear eyes at the poor mortals who pray to her.
She seems to have what I never saw in any woman before--a fountain of
friendship towards men--a man can make a friend of her.  Casaubon must
have raised some heroic hallucination in her.  I wonder if she could
have any other sort of passion for a man?  Ladislaw?--there was
certainly an unusual feeling between them.  And Casaubon must have had
a notion of it.  Well--her love might help a man more than her money."

Dorothea on her side had immediately formed a plan of relieving Lydgate
from his obligation to Bulstrode, which she felt sure was a part,
though small, of the galling pressure he had to bear.  She sat down at
once under the inspiration of their interview, and wrote a brief note,
in which she pleaded that she had more claim than Mr. Bulstrode had to
the satisfaction of providing the money which had been serviceable to
Lydgate--that it would be unkind in Lydgate not to grant her the
position of being his helper in this small matter, the favor being
entirely to her who had so little that was plainly marked out for her
to do with her superfluous money.  He might call her a creditor or by
any other name if it did but imply that he granted her request.  She
enclosed a check for a thousand pounds, and determined to take the
letter with her the next day when she went to see Rosamond.



CHAPTER LXXVII.

    "And thus thy fall hath left a kind of blot,
     To mark the full-fraught man and best indued
     With some suspicion."
                                         --Henry V.


The next day Lydgate had to go to Brassing, and told Rosamond that he
should be away until the evening.  Of late she had never gone beyond
her own house and garden, except to church, and once to see her papa,
to whom she said, "If Tertius goes away, you will help us to move, will
you not, papa?  I suppose we shall have very little money.  I am sure I
hope some one will help us." And Mr. Vincy had said, "Yes, child, I
don't mind a hundred or two.  I can see the end of that."  With these
exceptions she had sat at home in languid melancholy and suspense,
fixing her mind on Will Ladislaw's coming as the one point of hope and
interest, and associating this with some new urgency on Lydgate to make
immediate arrangements for leaving Middlemarch and going to London,
till she felt assured that the coming would be a potent cause of the
going, without at all seeing how.  This way of establishing sequences
is too common to be fairly regarded as a peculiar folly in Rosamond.
And it is precisely this sort of sequence which causes the greatest
shock when it is sundered: for to see how an effect may be produced is
often to see possible missings and checks; but to see nothing except
the desirable cause, and close upon it the desirable effect, rids us of
doubt and makes our minds strongly intuitive.  That was the process
going on in poor Rosamond, while she arranged all objects around her
with the same nicety as ever, only with more slowness--or sat down to
the piano, meaning to play, and then desisting, yet lingering on the
music stool with her white fingers suspended on the wooden front, and
looking before her in dreamy ennui.  Her melancholy had become so
marked that Lydgate felt a strange timidity before it, as a perpetual
silent reproach, and the strong man, mastered by his keen sensibilities
towards this fair fragile creature whose life he seemed somehow to have
bruised, shrank from her look, and sometimes started at her approach,
fear of her and fear for her rushing in only the more forcibly after it
had been momentarily expelled by exasperation.

But this morning Rosamond descended from her room upstairs--where she
sometimes sat the whole day when Lydgate was out--equipped for a walk
in the town.  She had a letter to post--a letter addressed to Mr.
Ladislaw and written with charming discretion, but intended to hasten
his arrival by a hint of trouble.  The servant-maid, their sole
house-servant now, noticed her coming down-stairs in her walking dress,
and thought "there never did anybody look so pretty in a bonnet poor
thing."

Meanwhile Dorothea's mind was filled with her project of going to
Rosamond, and with the many thoughts, both of the past and the probable
future, which gathered round the idea of that visit.  Until yesterday
when Lydgate had opened to her a glimpse of some trouble in his married
life, the image of Mrs. Lydgate had always been associated for her with
that of Will Ladislaw.  Even in her most uneasy moments--even when she
had been agitated by Mrs. Cadwallader's painfully graphic report of
gossip--her effort, nay, her strongest impulsive prompting, had been
towards the vindication of Will from any sullying surmises; and when,
in her meeting with him afterwards, she had at first interpreted his
words as a probable allusion to a feeling towards Mrs. Lydgate which he
was determined to cut himself off from indulging, she had had a quick,
sad, excusing vision of the charm there might be in his constant
opportunities of companionship with that fair creature, who most likely
shared his other tastes as she evidently did his delight in music.  But
there had followed his parting words--the few passionate words in
which he had implied that she herself was the object of whom his love
held him in dread, that it was his love for her only which he was
resolved not to declare but to carry away into banishment.  From the
time of that parting, Dorothea, believing in Will's love for her,
believing with a proud delight in his delicate sense of honor and his
determination that no one should impeach him justly, felt her heart
quite at rest as to the regard he might have for Mrs. Lydgate.  She was
sure that the regard was blameless.

There are natures in which, if they love us, we are conscious of having
a sort of baptism and consecration: they bind us over to rectitude and
purity by their pure belief about us; and our sins become that worst
kind of sacrilege which tears down the invisible altar of trust.  "If
you are not good, none is good"--those little words may give a
terrific meaning to responsibility, may hold a vitriolic intensity for
remorse.

Dorothea's nature was of that kind: her own passionate faults lay along
the easily counted open channels of her ardent character; and while she
was full of pity for the visible mistakes of others, she had not yet
any material within her experience for subtle constructions and
suspicions of hidden wrong.  But that simplicity of hers, holding up an
ideal for others in her believing conception of them, was one of the
great powers of her womanhood.  And it had from the first acted
strongly on Will Ladislaw.  He felt, when he parted from her, that the
brief words by which he had tried to convey to her his feeling about
herself and the division which her fortune made between them, would
only profit by their brevity when Dorothea had to interpret them: he
felt that in her mind he had found his highest estimate.

And he was right there.  In the months since their parting Dorothea had
felt a delicious though sad repose in their relation to each other, as
one which was inwardly whole and without blemish.  She had an active
force of antagonism within her, when the antagonism turned on the
defence either of plans or persons that she believed in; and the wrongs
which she felt that Will had received from her husband, and the
external conditions which to others were grounds for slighting him,
only gave the more tenacity to her affection and admiring judgment.
And now with the disclosures about Bulstrode had come another fact
affecting Will's social position, which roused afresh Dorothea's inward
resistance to what was said about him in that part of her world which
lay within park palings.

"Young Ladislaw the grandson of a thieving Jew pawnbroker" was a phrase
which had entered emphatically into the dialogues about the Bulstrode
business, at Lowick, Tipton, and Freshitt, and was a worse kind of
placard on poor Will's back than the "Italian with white mice."
Upright Sir James Chettam was convinced that his own satisfaction was
righteous when he thought with some complacency that here was an added
league to that mountainous distance between Ladislaw and Dorothea,
which enabled him to dismiss any anxiety in that direction as too
absurd.  And perhaps there had been some pleasure in pointing Mr.
Brooke's attention to this ugly bit of Ladislaw's genealogy, as a fresh
candle for him to see his own folly by.  Dorothea had observed the
animus with which Will's part in the painful story had been recalled
more than once; but she had uttered no word, being checked now, as she
had not been formerly in speaking of Will, by the consciousness of a
deeper relation between them which must always remain in consecrated
secrecy.  But her silence shrouded her resistant emotion into a more
thorough glow; and this misfortune in Will's lot which, it seemed,
others were wishing to fling at his back as an opprobrium, only gave
something more of enthusiasm to her clinging thought.

She entertained no visions of their ever coming into nearer union, and
yet she had taken no posture of renunciation.  She had accepted her
whole relation to Will very simply as part of her marriage sorrows, and
would have thought it very sinful in her to keep up an inward wail
because she was not completely happy, being rather disposed to dwell on
the superfluities of her lot.  She could bear that the chief pleasures
of her tenderness should lie in memory, and the idea of marriage came
to her solely as a repulsive proposition from some suitor of whom she
at present knew nothing, but whose merits, as seen by her friends,
would be a source of torment to her:--"somebody who will manage your
property for you, my dear," was Mr. Brooke's attractive suggestion of
suitable characteristics.  "I should like to manage it myself, if I
knew what to do with it," said Dorothea.  No--she adhered to her
declaration that she would never be married again, and in the long
valley of her life which looked so flat and empty of waymarks, guidance
would come as she walked along the road, and saw her fellow-passengers
by the way.

This habitual state of feeling about Will Ladislaw had been strong in
all her waking hours since she had proposed to pay a visit to Mrs.
Lydgate, making a sort of background against which she saw Rosamond's
figure presented to her without hindrances to her interest and
compassion.  There was evidently some mental separation, some barrier
to complete confidence which had arisen between this wife and the
husband who had yet made her happiness a law to him.  That was a
trouble which no third person must directly touch.  But Dorothea
thought with deep pity of the loneliness which must have come upon
Rosamond from the suspicions cast on her husband; and there would
surely be help in the manifestation of respect for Lydgate and sympathy
with her.

"I shall talk to her about her husband," thought Dorothea, as she was
being driven towards the town.  The clear spring morning, the scent of
the moist earth, the fresh leaves just showing their creased-up wealth
of greenery from out their half-opened sheaths, seemed part of the
cheerfulness she was feeling from a long conversation with Mr.
Farebrother, who had joyfully accepted the justifying explanation of
Lydgate's conduct.  "I shall take Mrs. Lydgate good news, and perhaps
she will like to talk to me and make a friend of me."

Dorothea had another errand in Lowick Gate: it was about a new
fine-toned bell for the school-house, and as she had to get out of her
carriage very near to Lydgate's, she walked thither across the street,
having told the coachman to wait for some packages.  The street door
was open, and the servant was taking the opportunity of looking out at
the carriage which was pausing within sight when it became apparent to
her that the lady who "belonged to it" was coming towards her.

"Is Mrs. Lydgate at home?" said Dorothea.

"I'm not sure, my lady; I'll see, if you'll please to walk in," said
Martha, a little confused on the score of her kitchen apron, but
collected enough to be sure that "mum" was not the right title for this
queenly young widow with a carriage and pair.  "Will you please to walk
in, and I'll go and see."

"Say that I am Mrs. Casaubon," said Dorothea, as Martha moved forward
intending to show her into the drawing-room and then to go up-stairs to
see if Rosamond had returned from her walk.

They crossed the broader part of the entrance-hall, and turned up the
passage which led to the garden.  The drawing-room door was unlatched,
and Martha, pushing it without looking into the room, waited for Mrs.
Casaubon to enter and then turned away, the door having swung open and
swung back again without noise.

Dorothea had less of outward vision than usual this morning, being
filled with images of things as they had been and were going to be.
She found herself on the other side of the door without seeing anything
remarkable, but immediately she heard a voice speaking in low tones
which startled her as with a sense of dreaming in daylight, and
advancing unconsciously a step or two beyond the projecting slab of a
bookcase, she saw, in the terrible illumination of a certainty which
filled up all outlines, something which made her pause, motionless,
without self-possession enough to speak.

Seated with his back towards her on a sofa which stood against the wall
on a line with the door by which she had entered, she saw Will
Ladislaw: close by him and turned towards him with a flushed
tearfulness which gave a new brilliancy to her face sat Rosamond, her
bonnet hanging back, while Will leaning towards her clasped both her
upraised hands in his and spoke with low-toned fervor.

Rosamond in her agitated absorption had not noticed the silently
advancing figure; but when Dorothea, after the first immeasurable
instant of this vision, moved confusedly backward and found herself
impeded by some piece of furniture, Rosamond was suddenly aware of her
presence, and with a spasmodic movement snatched away her hands and
rose, looking at Dorothea who was necessarily arrested.  Will Ladislaw,
starting up, looked round also, and meeting Dorothea's eyes with a new
lightning in them, seemed changing to marble: But she immediately
turned them away from him to Rosamond and said in a firm voice--

"Excuse me, Mrs. Lydgate, the servant did not know that you were here.
I called to deliver an important letter for Mr. Lydgate, which I wished
to put into your own hands."

She laid down the letter on the small table which had checked her
retreat, and then including Rosamond and Will in one distant glance and
bow, she went quickly out of the room, meeting in the passage the
surprised Martha, who said she was sorry the mistress was not at home,
and then showed the strange lady out with an inward reflection that
grand people were probably more impatient than others.

Dorothea walked across the street with her most elastic step and was
quickly in her carriage again.

"Drive on to Freshitt Hall," she said to the coachman, and any one
looking at her might have thought that though she was paler than usual
she was never animated by a more self-possessed energy.  And that was
really her experience.  It was as if she had drunk a great draught of
scorn that stimulated her beyond the susceptibility to other feelings.
She had seen something so far below her belief, that her emotions
rushed back from it and made an excited throng without an object.  She
needed something active to turn her excitement out upon.  She felt
power to walk and work for a day, without meat or drink.  And she would
carry out the purpose with which she had started in the morning, of
going to Freshitt and Tipton to tell Sir James and her uncle all that
she wished them to know about Lydgate, whose married loneliness under
his trial now presented itself to her with new significance, and made
her more ardent in readiness to be his champion.  She had never felt
anything like this triumphant power of indignation in the struggle of
her married life, in which there had always been a quickly subduing
pang; and she took it as a sign of new strength.

"Dodo, how very bright your eyes are!" said Celia, when Sir James was
gone out of the room.  "And you don't see anything you look at, Arthur
or anything.  You are going to do something uncomfortable, I know.  Is
it all about Mr. Lydgate, or has something else happened?" Celia had
been used to watch her sister with expectation.

"Yes, dear, a great many things have happened," said Dodo, in her full
tones.

"I wonder what," said Celia, folding her arms cozily and leaning
forward upon them.

"Oh, all the troubles of all people on the face of the earth," said
Dorothea, lifting her arms to the back of her head.

"Dear me, Dodo, are you going to have a scheme for them?" said Celia, a
little uneasy at this Hamlet-like raving.

But Sir James came in again, ready to accompany Dorothea to the Grange,
and she finished her expedition well, not swerving in her resolution
until she descended at her own door.



CHAPTER LXXVIII.

    "Would it were yesterday and I i' the grave,
     With her sweet faith above for monument"


Rosamond and Will stood motionless--they did not know how long--he
looking towards the spot where Dorothea had stood, and she looking
towards him with doubt.  It seemed an endless time to Rosamond, in
whose inmost soul there was hardly so much annoyance as gratification
from what had just happened.  Shallow natures dream of an easy sway
over the emotions of others, trusting implicitly in their own petty
magic to turn the deepest streams, and confident, by pretty gestures
and remarks, of making the thing that is not as though it were.  She
knew that Will had received a severe blow, but she had been little used
to imagining other people's states of mind except as a material cut
into shape by her own wishes; and she believed in her own power to
soothe or subdue.  Even Tertius, that most perverse of men, was always
subdued in the long-run: events had been obstinate, but still Rosamond
would have said now, as she did before her marriage, that she never
gave up what she had set her mind on.

She put out her arm and laid the tips of her fingers on Will's
coat-sleeve.

"Don't touch me!" he said, with an utterance like the cut of a lash,
darting from her, and changing from pink to white and back again, as if
his whole frame were tingling with the pain of the sting.  He wheeled
round to the other side of the room and stood opposite to her, with the
tips of his fingers in his pockets and his head thrown back, looking
fiercely not at Rosamond but at a point a few inches away from her.

She was keenly offended, but the Signs she made of this were such as
only Lydgate was used to interpret.  She became suddenly quiet and
seated herself, untying her hanging bonnet and laying it down with her
shawl.  Her little hands which she folded before her were very cold.

It would have been safer for Will in the first instance to have taken
up his hat and gone away; but he had felt no impulse to do this; on the
contrary, he had a horrible inclination to stay and shatter Rosamond
with his anger.  It seemed as impossible to bear the fatality she had
drawn down on him without venting his fury as it would be to a panther
to bear the javelin-wound without springing and biting.  And yet--how
could he tell a woman that he was ready to curse her?  He was fuming
under a repressive law which he was forced to acknowledge: he was
dangerously poised, and Rosamond's voice now brought the decisive
vibration.  In flute-like tones of sarcasm she said--

"You can easily go after Mrs. Casaubon and explain your preference."

"Go after her!" he burst out, with a sharp edge in his voice.  "Do you
think she would turn to look at me, or value any word I ever uttered to
her again at more than a dirty feather?--Explain!  How can a man
explain at the expense of a woman?"

"You can tell her what you please," said Rosamond with more tremor.

"Do you suppose she would like me better for sacrificing you?  She is
not a woman to be flattered because I made myself despicable--to
believe that I must be true to her because I was a dastard to you."

He began to move about with the restlessness of a wild animal that sees
prey but cannot reach it.  Presently he burst out again--

"I had no hope before--not much--of anything better to come.  But I had
one certainty--that she believed in me.  Whatever people had said or
done about me, she believed in me.--That's gone!  She'll never again
think me anything but a paltry pretence--too nice to take heaven
except upon flattering conditions, and yet selling myself for any
devil's change by the sly.  She'll think of me as an incarnate insult
to her, from the first moment we--"

Will stopped as if he had found himself grasping something that must
not be thrown and shattered.  He found another vent for his rage by
snatching up Rosamond's words again, as if they were reptiles to be
throttled and flung off.

"Explain!  Tell a man to explain how he dropped into hell!  Explain my
preference!  I never had a _preference_ for her, any more than I have a
preference for breathing.  No other woman exists by the side of her.  I
would rather touch her hand if it were dead, than I would touch any
other woman's living."

Rosamond, while these poisoned weapons were being hurled at her, was
almost losing the sense of her identity, and seemed to be waking into
some new terrible existence.  She had no sense of chill resolute
repulsion, of reticent self-justification such as she had known under
Lydgate's most stormy displeasure: all her sensibility was turned into
a bewildering novelty of pain; she felt a new terrified recoil under a
lash never experienced before.  What another nature felt in opposition
to her own was being burnt and bitten into her consciousness.  When
Will had ceased to speak she had become an image of sickened misery:
her lips were pale, and her eyes had a tearless dismay in them.  If it
had been Tertius who stood opposite to her, that look of misery would
have been a pang to him, and he would have sunk by her side to comfort
her, with that strong-armed comfort which, she had often held very
cheap.

Let it be forgiven to Will that he had no such movement of pity.  He
had felt no bond beforehand to this woman who had spoiled the ideal
treasure of his life, and he held himself blameless.  He knew that he
was cruel, but he had no relenting in him yet.

After he had done speaking, he still moved about, half in absence of
mind, and Rosamond sat perfectly still.  At length Will, seeming to
bethink himself, took up his hat, yet stood some moments irresolute.
He had spoken to her in a way that made a phrase of common politeness
difficult to utter; and yet, now that he had come to the point of going
away from her without further speech, he shrank from it as a brutality;
he felt checked and stultified in his anger.  He walked towards the
mantel-piece and leaned his arm on it, and waited in silence for--he
hardly knew what.  The vindictive fire was still burning in him, and he
could utter no word of retractation; but it was nevertheless in his
mind that having come back to this hearth where he had enjoyed a
caressing friendship he had found calamity seated there--he had had
suddenly revealed to him a trouble that lay outside the home as well as
within it.  And what seemed a foreboding was pressing upon him as with
slow pincers:--that his life might come to be enslaved by this helpless
woman who had thrown herself upon him in the dreary sadness of her
heart.  But he was in gloomy rebellion against the fact that his quick
apprehensiveness foreshadowed to him, and when his eyes fell on
Rosamond's blighted face it seemed to him that he was the more pitiable
of the two; for pain must enter into its glorified life of memory
before it can turn into compassion.

And so they remained for many minutes, opposite each other, far apart,
in silence; Will's face still possessed by a mute rage, and Rosamond's
by a mute misery.  The poor thing had no force to fling out any passion
in return; the terrible collapse of the illusion towards which all her
hope had been strained was a stroke which had too thoroughly shaken
her: her little world was in ruins, and she felt herself tottering in
the midst as a lonely bewildered consciousness.

Will wished that she would speak and bring some mitigating shadow
across his own cruel speech, which seemed to stand staring at them both
in mockery of any attempt at revived fellowship.  But she said nothing,
and at last with a desperate effort over himself, he asked, "Shall I
come in and see Lydgate this evening?"

"If you like," Rosamond answered, just audibly.

And then Will went out of the house, Martha never knowing that he had
been in.

After he was gone, Rosamond tried to get up from her seat, but fell
back fainting.  When she came to herself again, she felt too ill to
make the exertion of rising to ring the bell, and she remained helpless
until the girl, surprised at her long absence, thought for the first
time of looking for her in all the down-stairs rooms.  Rosamond said
that she had felt suddenly sick and faint, and wanted to be helped
up-stairs. When there she threw herself on the bed with her clothes on,
and lay in apparent torpor, as she had done once before on a memorable
day of grief.

Lydgate came home earlier than he had expected, about half-past five,
and found her there.  The perception that she was ill threw every other
thought into the background.  When he felt her pulse, her eyes rested
on him with more persistence than they had done for a long while, as if
she felt some content that he was there.  He perceived the difference
in a moment, and seating himself by her put his arm gently under her,
and bending over her said, "My poor Rosamond! has something agitated
you?"  Clinging to him she fell into hysterical sobbings and cries, and
for the next hour he did nothing but soothe and tend her.  He imagined
that Dorothea had been to see her, and that all this effect on her
nervous system, which evidently involved some new turning towards
himself, was due to the excitement of the new impressions which that
visit had raised.



CHAPTER LXXIX.

    "Now, I saw in my dream, that just as they had ended their
    talk, they drew nigh to a very miry slough, that was in the
    midst of the plain; and they, being heedless, did both fall
    suddenly into the bog. The name of the slough was
    Despond."--BUNYAN.


When Rosamond was quiet, and Lydgate had left her, hoping that she
might soon sleep under the effect of an anodyne, he went into the
drawing-room to fetch a book which he had left there, meaning to spend
the evening in his work-room, and he saw on the table Dorothea's letter
addressed to him.  He had not ventured to ask Rosamond if Mrs. Casaubon
had called, but the reading of this letter assured him of the fact, for
Dorothea mentioned that it was to be carried by herself.

When Will Ladislaw came in a little later Lydgate met him with a
surprise which made it clear that he had not been told of the earlier
visit, and Will could not say, "Did not Mrs. Lydgate tell you that I
came this morning?"

"Poor Rosamond is ill," Lydgate added immediately on his greeting.

"Not seriously, I hope," said Will.

"No--only a slight nervous shock--the effect of some agitation.  She
has been overwrought lately.  The truth is, Ladislaw, I am an unlucky
devil.  We have gone through several rounds of purgatory since you
left, and I have lately got on to a worse ledge of it than ever.  I
suppose you are only just come down--you look rather battered--you
have not been long enough in the town to hear anything?"

"I travelled all night and got to the White Hart at eight o'clock this
morning. I have been shutting myself up and resting," said Will,
feeling himself a sneak, but seeing no alternative to this evasion.

And then he heard Lydgate's account of the troubles which Rosamond had
already depicted to him in her way.  She had not mentioned the fact of
Will's name being connected with the public story--this detail not
immediately affecting her--and he now heard it for the first time.

"I thought it better to tell you that your name is mixed up with the
disclosures," said Lydgate, who could understand better than most men
how Ladislaw might be stung by the revelation.  "You will be sure to
hear it as soon as you turn out into the town.  I suppose it is true
that Raffles spoke to you."

"Yes," said Will, sardonically.  "I shall be fortunate if gossip does
not make me the most disreputable person in the whole affair.  I should
think the latest version must be, that I plotted with Raffles to murder
Bulstrode, and ran away from Middlemarch for the purpose."

He was thinking "Here is a new ring in the sound of my name to
recommend it in her hearing; however--what does it signify now?"

But he said nothing of Bulstrode's offer to him.  Will was very open
and careless about his personal affairs, but it was among the more
exquisite touches in nature's modelling of him that he had a delicate
generosity which warned him into reticence here.  He shrank from saying
that he had rejected Bulstrode's money, in the moment when he was
learning that it was Lydgate's misfortune to have accepted it.

Lydgate too was reticent in the midst of his confidence.  He made no
allusion to Rosamond's feeling under their trouble, and of Dorothea he
only said, "Mrs. Casaubon has been the one person to come forward and
say that she had no belief in any of the suspicions against me."
Observing a change in Will's face, he avoided any further mention of
her, feeling himself too ignorant of their relation to each other not
to fear that his words might have some hidden painful bearing on it.
And it occurred to him that Dorothea was the real cause of the present
visit to Middlemarch.

The two men were pitying each other, but it was only Will who guessed
the extent of his companion's trouble.  When Lydgate spoke with
desperate resignation of going to settle in London, and said with a
faint smile, "We shall have you again, old fellow." Will felt
inexpressibly mournful, and said nothing.  Rosamond had that morning
entreated him to urge this step on Lydgate; and it seemed to him as if
he were beholding in a magic panorama a future where he himself was
sliding into that pleasureless yielding to the small solicitations of
circumstance, which is a commoner history of perdition than any single
momentous bargain.

We are on a perilous margin when we begin to look passively at our
future selves, and see our own figures led with dull consent into
insipid misdoing and shabby achievement.  Poor Lydgate was inwardly
groaning on that margin, and Will was arriving at it.  It seemed to him
this evening as if the cruelty of his outburst to Rosamond had made an
obligation for him, and he dreaded the obligation: he dreaded Lydgate's
unsuspecting good-will: he dreaded his own distaste for his spoiled
life, which would leave him in motiveless levity.



CHAPTER LXXX.

       "Stern lawgiver! yet thou dost wear
        The Godhead's most benignant grace;
        Nor know we anything so fair
        As is the smile upon thy face;
        Flowers laugh before thee on their beds,
        And fragrance in thy footing treads;
        Thou dost preserve the Stars from wrong;
    And the most ancient Heavens, through thee, are fresh and strong.
                                        --WORDSWORTH: Ode to Duty.


When Dorothea had seen Mr. Farebrother in the morning, she had promised
to go and dine at the parsonage on her return from Freshitt.  There was
a frequent interchange of visits between her and the Farebrother
family, which enabled her to say that she was not at all lonely at the
Manor, and to resist for the present the severe prescription of a lady
companion.  When she reached home and remembered her engagement, she
was glad of it; and finding that she had still an hour before she could
dress for dinner, she walked straight to the schoolhouse and entered
into a conversation with the master and mistress about the new bell,
giving eager attention to their small details and repetitions, and
getting up a dramatic sense that her life was very busy.  She paused on
her way back to talk to old Master Bunney who was putting in some
garden-seeds, and discoursed wisely with that rural sage about the
crops that would make the most return on a perch of ground, and the
result of sixty years' experience as to soils--namely, that if your
soil was pretty mellow it would do, but if there came wet, wet, wet to
make it all of a mummy, why then--

Finding that the social spirit had beguiled her into being rather late,
she dressed hastily and went over to the parsonage rather earlier than
was necessary.  That house was never dull, Mr. Farebrother, like
another White of Selborne, having continually something new to tell of
his inarticulate guests and proteges, whom he was teaching the boys not
to torment; and he had just set up a pair of beautiful goats to be pets
of the village in general, and to walk at large as sacred animals.  The
evening went by cheerfully till after tea, Dorothea talking more than
usual and dilating with Mr. Farebrother on the possible histories of
creatures that converse compendiously with their antennae, and for
aught we know may hold reformed parliaments; when suddenly some
inarticulate little sounds were heard which called everybody's
attention.

"Henrietta Noble," said Mrs. Farebrother, seeing her small sister
moving about the furniture-legs distressfully, "what is the matter?"

"I have lost my tortoise-shell lozenge-box. I fear the kitten has
rolled it away," said the tiny old lady, involuntarily continuing her
beaver-like notes.

"Is it a great treasure, aunt?" said Mr. Farebrother, putting up his
glasses and looking at the carpet.

"Mr. Ladislaw gave it me," said Miss Noble.  "A German box--very
pretty, but if it falls it always spins away as far as it can."

"Oh, if it is Ladislaw's present," said Mr. Farebrother, in a deep tone
of comprehension, getting up and hunting.  The box was found at last
under a chiffonier, and Miss Noble grasped it with delight, saying, "it
was under a fender the last time."

"That is an affair of the heart with my aunt," said Mr. Farebrother,
smiling at Dorothea, as he reseated himself.

"If Henrietta Noble forms an attachment to any one, Mrs. Casaubon,"
said his mother, emphatically,--"she is like a dog--she would take
their shoes for a pillow and sleep the better."

"Mr. Ladislaw's shoes, I would," said Henrietta Noble.

Dorothea made an attempt at smiling in return.  She was surprised and
annoyed to find that her heart was palpitating violently, and that it
was quite useless to try after a recovery of her former animation.
Alarmed at herself--fearing some further betrayal of a change so marked
in its occasion, she rose and said in a low voice with undisguised
anxiety, "I must go; I have overtired myself."

Mr. Farebrother, quick in perception, rose and said, "It is true; you
must have half-exhausted yourself in talking about Lydgate.  That sort
of work tells upon one after the excitement is over."

He gave her his arm back to the Manor, but Dorothea did not attempt to
speak, even when he said good-night.

The limit of resistance was reached, and she had sunk back helpless
within the clutch of inescapable anguish.  Dismissing Tantripp with a
few faint words, she locked her door, and turning away from it towards
the vacant room she pressed her hands hard on the top of her head, and
moaned out--

"Oh, I did love him!"

Then came the hour in which the waves of suffering shook her too
thoroughly to leave any power of thought.  She could only cry in loud
whispers, between her sobs, after her lost belief which she had planted
and kept alive from a very little seed since the days in Rome--after
her lost joy of clinging with silent love and faith to one who,
misprized by others, was worthy in her thought--after her lost woman's
pride of reigning in his memory--after her sweet dim perspective of
hope, that along some pathway they should meet with unchanged
recognition and take up the backward years as a yesterday.

In that hour she repeated what the merciful eyes of solitude have
looked on for ages in the spiritual struggles of man--she besought
hardness and coldness and aching weariness to bring her relief from the
mysterious incorporeal might of her anguish: she lay on the bare floor
and let the night grow cold around her; while her grand woman's frame
was shaken by sobs as if she had been a despairing child.

There were two images--two living forms that tore her heart in two, as
if it had been the heart of a mother who seems to see her child divided
by the sword, and presses one bleeding half to her breast while her
gaze goes forth in agony towards the half which is carried away by the
lying woman that has never known the mother's pang.

Here, with the nearness of an answering smile, here within the
vibrating bond of mutual speech, was the bright creature whom she had
trusted--who had come to her like the spirit of morning visiting the
dim vault where she sat as the bride of a worn-out life; and now, with
a full consciousness which had never awakened before, she stretched out
her arms towards him and cried with bitter cries that their nearness
was a parting vision: she discovered her passion to herself in the
unshrinking utterance of despair.

And there, aloof, yet persistently with her, moving wherever she moved,
was the Will Ladislaw who was a changed belief exhausted of hope, a
detected illusion--no, a living man towards whom there could not yet
struggle any wail of regretful pity, from the midst of scorn and
indignation and jealous offended pride.  The fire of Dorothea's anger
was not easily spent, and it flamed out in fitful returns of spurning
reproach.  Why had he come obtruding his life into hers, hers that
might have been whole enough without him?  Why had he brought his cheap
regard and his lip-born words to her who had nothing paltry to give in
exchange?  He knew that he was deluding her--wished, in the very moment
of farewell, to make her believe that he gave her the whole price of
her heart, and knew that he had spent it half before.  Why had he not
stayed among the crowd of whom she asked nothing--but only prayed that
they might be less contemptible?

But she lost energy at last even for her loud-whispered cries and
moans: she subsided into helpless sobs, and on the cold floor she
sobbed herself to sleep.

In the chill hours of the morning twilight, when all was dim around
her, she awoke--not with any amazed wondering where she was or what had
happened, but with the clearest consciousness that she was looking into
the eyes of sorrow.  She rose, and wrapped warm things around her, and
seated herself in a great chair where she had often watched before.
She was vigorous enough to have borne that hard night without feeling
ill in body, beyond some aching and fatigue; but she had waked to a new
condition: she felt as if her soul had been liberated from its terrible
conflict; she was no longer wrestling with her grief, but could sit
down with it as a lasting companion and make it a sharer in her
thoughts.  For now the thoughts came thickly.  It was not in Dorothea's
nature, for longer than the duration of a paroxysm, to sit in the
narrow cell of her calamity, in the besotted misery of a consciousness
that only sees another's lot as an accident of its own.

She began now to live through that yesterday morning deliberately
again, forcing herself to dwell on every detail and its possible
meaning.  Was she alone in that scene?  Was it her event only?  She
forced herself to think of it as bound up with another woman's life--a
woman towards whom she had set out with a longing to carry some
clearness and comfort into her beclouded youth.  In her first outleap
of jealous indignation and disgust, when quitting the hateful room, she
had flung away all the mercy with which she had undertaken that visit.
She had enveloped both Will and Rosamond in her burning scorn, and it
seemed to her as if Rosamond were burned out of her sight forever.  But
that base prompting which makes a women more cruel to a rival than to a
faithless lover, could have no strength of recurrence in Dorothea when
the dominant spirit of justice within her had once overcome the tumult
and had once shown her the truer measure of things.  All the active
thought with which she had before been representing to herself the
trials of Lydgate's lot, and this young marriage union which, like her
own, seemed to have its hidden as well as evident troubles--all this
vivid sympathetic experience returned to her now as a power: it
asserted itself as acquired knowledge asserts itself and will not let
us see as we saw in the day of our ignorance.  She said to her own
irremediable grief, that it should make her more helpful, instead of
driving her back from effort.

And what sort of crisis might not this be in three lives whose contact
with hers laid an obligation on her as if they had been suppliants
bearing the sacred branch?  The objects of her rescue were not to be
sought out by her fancy: they were chosen for her.  She yearned towards
the perfect Right, that it might make a throne within her, and rule her
errant will.  "What should I do--how should I act now, this very day,
if I could clutch my own pain, and compel it to silence, and think of
those three?"

It had taken long for her to come to that question, and there was light
piercing into the room.  She opened her curtains, and looked out
towards the bit of road that lay in view, with fields beyond outside
the entrance-gates. On the road there was a man with a bundle on his
back and a woman carrying her baby; in the field she could see figures
moving--perhaps the shepherd with his dog.  Far off in the bending sky
was the pearly light; and she felt the largeness of the world and the
manifold wakings of men to labor and endurance.  She was a part of that
involuntary, palpitating life, and could neither look out on it from
her luxurious shelter as a mere spectator, nor hide her eyes in selfish
complaining.

What she would resolve to do that day did not yet seem quite clear, but
something that she could achieve stirred her as with an approaching
murmur which would soon gather distinctness.  She took off the clothes
which seemed to have some of the weariness of a hard watching in them,
and began to make her toilet.  Presently she rang for Tantripp, who
came in her dressing-gown.

"Why, madam, you've never been in bed this blessed night," burst out
Tantripp, looking first at the bed and then at Dorothea's face, which
in spite of bathing had the pale cheeks and pink eyelids of a mater
dolorosa. "You'll kill yourself, you _will_.  Anybody might think now
you had a right to give yourself a little comfort."

"Don't be alarmed, Tantripp," said Dorothea, smiling.  "I have slept; I
am not ill.  I shall be glad of a cup of coffee as soon as possible.
And I want you to bring me my new dress; and most likely I shall want
my new bonnet to-day."

"They've lain there a month and more ready for you, madam, and most
thankful I shall be to see you with a couple o' pounds' worth less of
crape," said Tantripp, stooping to light the fire.  "There's a reason
in mourning, as I've always said; and three folds at the bottom of your
skirt and a plain quilling in your bonnet--and if ever anybody looked
like an angel, it's you in a net quilling--is what's consistent for a
second year.  At least, that's _my_ thinking," ended Tantripp, looking
anxiously at the fire; "and if anybody was to marry me flattering
himself I should wear those hijeous weepers two years for him, he'd be
deceived by his own vanity, that's all."

"The fire will do, my good Tan," said Dorothea, speaking as she used to
do in the old Lausanne days, only with a very low voice; "get me the
coffee."

She folded herself in the large chair, and leaned her head against it
in fatigued quiescence, while Tantripp went away wondering at this
strange contrariness in her young mistress--that just the morning when
she had more of a widow's face than ever, she should have asked for her
lighter mourning which she had waived before.  Tantripp would never
have found the clew to this mystery.  Dorothea wished to acknowledge
that she had not the less an active life before her because she had
buried a private joy; and the tradition that fresh garments belonged to
all initiation, haunting her mind, made her grasp after even that
slight outward help towards calm resolve.  For the resolve was not easy.

Nevertheless at eleven o'clock she was walking towards Middlemarch,
having made up her mind that she would make as quietly and unnoticeably
as possible her second attempt to see and save Rosamond.



CHAPTER LXXXI.

    "Du Erde warst auch diese Nacht bestandig,
     Und athmest neu erquickt zu meinen Fussen,
     Beginnest schon mit Lust mich zu umgeben,
     Zum regst und ruhrst ein kraftiges Reschliessen
     Zum hochsten Dasein immerfort zu streben.
                                   --Faust: 2r Theil.


When Dorothea was again at Lydgate's door speaking to Martha, he was in
the room close by with the door ajar, preparing to go out.  He heard
her voice, and immediately came to her.

"Do you think that Mrs. Lydgate can receive me this morning?" she said,
having reflected that it would be better to leave out all allusion to
her previous visit.

"I have no doubt she will," said Lydgate, suppressing his thought about
Dorothea's looks, which were as much changed as Rosamond's, "if you
will be kind enough to come in and let me tell her that you are here.
She has not been very well since you were here yesterday, but she is
better this morning, and I think it is very likely that she will be
cheered by seeing you again."

It was plain that Lydgate, as Dorothea had expected, knew nothing about
the circumstances of her yesterday's visit; nay, he appeared to imagine
that she had carried it out according to her intention.  She had
prepared a little note asking Rosamond to see her, which she would have
given to the servant if he had not been in the way, but now she was in
much anxiety as to the result of his announcement.

After leading her into the drawing-room, he paused to take a letter
from his pocket and put it into her hands, saying, "I wrote this last
night, and was going to carry it to Lowick in my ride.  When one is
grateful for something too good for common thanks, writing is less
unsatisfactory than speech--one does not at least _hear_ how inadequate
the words are."

Dorothea's face brightened.  "It is I who have most to thank for, since
you have let me take that place.  You _have_ consented?" she said,
suddenly doubting.

"Yes, the check is going to Bulstrode to-day."

He said no more, but went up-stairs to Rosamond, who had but lately
finished dressing herself, and sat languidly wondering what she should
do next, her habitual industry in small things, even in the days of her
sadness, prompting her to begin some kind of occupation, which she
dragged through slowly or paused in from lack of interest.  She looked
ill, but had recovered her usual quietude of manner, and Lydgate had
feared to disturb her by any questions.  He had told her of Dorothea's
letter containing the check, and afterwards he had said, "Ladislaw is
come, Rosy; he sat with me last night; I dare say he will be here again
to-day. I thought he looked rather battered and depressed."  And
Rosamond had made no reply.

Now, when he came up, he said to her very gently, "Rosy, dear, Mrs.
Casaubon is come to see you again; you would like to see her, would you
not?"  That she colored and gave rather a startled movement did not
surprise him after the agitation produced by the interview yesterday--a
beneficent agitation, he thought, since it seemed to have made her turn
to him again.

Rosamond dared not say no.  She dared not with a tone of her voice
touch the facts of yesterday.  Why had Mrs. Casaubon come again?  The
answer was a blank which Rosamond could only fill up with dread, for
Will Ladislaw's lacerating words had made every thought of Dorothea a
fresh smart to her.  Nevertheless, in her new humiliating uncertainty
she dared do nothing but comply.  She did not say yes, but she rose and
let Lydgate put a light shawl over her shoulders, while he said, "I am
going out immediately." Then something crossed her mind which prompted
her to say, "Pray tell Martha not to bring any one else into the
drawing-room." And Lydgate assented, thinking that he fully understood
this wish.  He led her down to the drawing-room door, and then turned
away, observing to himself that he was rather a blundering husband to
be dependent for his wife's trust in him on the influence of another
woman.

Rosamond, wrapping her soft shawl around her as she walked towards
Dorothea, was inwardly wrapping her soul in cold reserve.  Had Mrs.
Casaubon come to say anything to her about Will?  If so, it was a
liberty that Rosamond resented; and she prepared herself to meet every
word with polite impassibility.  Will had bruised her pride too sorely
for her to feel any compunction towards him and Dorothea: her own
injury seemed much the greater.  Dorothea was not only the "preferred"
woman, but had also a formidable advantage in being Lydgate's
benefactor; and to poor Rosamond's pained confused vision it seemed
that this Mrs. Casaubon--this woman who predominated in all things
concerning her--must have come now with the sense of having the
advantage, and with animosity prompting her to use it.  Indeed, not
Rosamond only, but any one else, knowing the outer facts of the case,
and not the simple inspiration on which Dorothea acted, might well have
wondered why she came.

Looking like the lovely ghost of herself, her graceful slimness wrapped
in her soft white shawl, the rounded infantine mouth and cheek
inevitably suggesting mildness and innocence, Rosamond paused at three
yards' distance from her visitor and bowed.  But Dorothea, who had
taken off her gloves, from an impulse which she could never resist when
she wanted a sense of freedom, came forward, and with her face full of
a sad yet sweet openness, put out her hand.  Rosamond could not avoid
meeting her glance, could not avoid putting her small hand into
Dorothea's, which clasped it with gentle motherliness; and immediately
a doubt of her own prepossessions began to stir within her.  Rosamond's
eye was quick for faces; she saw that Mrs. Casaubon's face looked pale
and changed since yesterday, yet gentle, and like the firm softness of
her hand.  But Dorothea had counted a little too much on her own
strength: the clearness and intensity of her mental action this morning
were the continuance of a nervous exaltation which made her frame as
dangerously responsive as a bit of finest Venetian crystal; and in
looking at Rosamond, she suddenly found her heart swelling, and was
unable to speak--all her effort was required to keep back tears.  She
succeeded in that, and the emotion only passed over her face like the
spirit of a sob; but it added to Rosamond's impression that Mrs.
Casaubon's state of mind must be something quite different from what
she had imagined.

So they sat down without a word of preface on the two chairs that
happened to be nearest, and happened also to be close together; though
Rosamond's notion when she first bowed was that she should stay a long
way off from Mrs. Casaubon.  But she ceased thinking how anything would
turn out--merely wondering what would come.  And Dorothea began to
speak quite simply, gathering firmness as she went on.

"I had an errand yesterday which I did not finish; that is why I am
here again so soon.  You will not think me too troublesome when I tell
you that I came to talk to you about the injustice that has been shown
towards Mr. Lydgate.  It will cheer you--will it not?--to know a great
deal about him, that he may not like to speak about himself just
because it is in his own vindication and to his own honor.  You will
like to know that your husband has warm friends, who have not left off
believing in his high character?  You will let me speak of this without
thinking that I take a liberty?"

The cordial, pleading tones which seemed to flow with generous
heedlessness above all the facts which had filled Rosamond's mind as
grounds of obstruction and hatred between her and this woman, came as
soothingly as a warm stream over her shrinking fears.  Of course Mrs.
Casaubon had the facts in her mind, but she was not going to speak of
anything connected with them.  That relief was too great for Rosamond
to feel much else at the moment.  She answered prettily, in the new
ease of her soul--

"I know you have been very good.  I shall like to hear anything you
will say to me about Tertius."

"The day before yesterday," said Dorothea, "when I had asked him to
come to Lowick to give me his opinion on the affairs of the Hospital,
he told me everything about his conduct and feelings in this sad event
which has made ignorant people cast suspicions on him.  The reason he
told me was because I was very bold and asked him.  I believed that he
had never acted dishonorably, and I begged him to tell me the history.
He confessed to me that he had never told it before, not even to you,
because he had a great dislike to say, 'I was not wrong,' as if that
were proof, when there are guilty people who will say so.  The truth
is, he knew nothing of this man Raffles, or that there were any bad
secrets about him; and he thought that Mr. Bulstrode offered him the
money because he repented, out of kindness, of having refused it
before.  All his anxiety about his patient was to treat him rightly,
and he was a little uncomfortable that the case did not end as he had
expected; but he thought then and still thinks that there may have been
no wrong in it on any one's part.  And I have told Mr. Farebrother, and
Mr. Brooke, and Sir James Chettam: they all believe in your husband.
That will cheer you, will it not?  That will give you courage?"

Dorothea's face had become animated, and as it beamed on Rosamond very
close to her, she felt something like bashful timidity before a
superior, in the presence of this self-forgetful ardor.  She said, with
blushing embarrassment, "Thank you: you are very kind."

"And he felt that he had been so wrong not to pour out everything about
this to you.  But you will forgive him.  It was because he feels so
much more about your happiness than anything else--he feels his life
bound into one with yours, and it hurts him more than anything, that
his misfortunes must hurt you.  He could speak to me because I am an
indifferent person.  And then I asked him if I might come to see you;
because I felt so much for his trouble and yours.  That is why I came
yesterday, and why I am come to-day. Trouble is so hard to bear, is it
not?--  How can we live and think that any one has trouble--piercing
trouble--and we could help them, and never try?"

Dorothea, completely swayed by the feeling that she was uttering,
forgot everything but that she was speaking from out the heart of her
own trial to Rosamond's. The emotion had wrought itself more and more
into her utterance, till the tones might have gone to one's very
marrow, like a low cry from some suffering creature in the darkness.
And she had unconsciously laid her hand again on the little hand that
she had pressed before.

Rosamond, with an overmastering pang, as if a wound within her had been
probed, burst into hysterical crying as she had done the day before
when she clung to her husband.  Poor Dorothea was feeling a great wave
of her own sorrow returning over her--her thought being drawn to the
possible share that Will Ladislaw might have in Rosamond's mental
tumult.  She was beginning to fear that she should not be able to
suppress herself enough to the end of this meeting, and while her hand
was still resting on Rosamond's lap, though the hand underneath it was
withdrawn, she was struggling against her own rising sobs.  She tried
to master herself with the thought that this might be a turning-point
in three lives--not in her own; no, there the irrevocable had
happened, but--in those three lives which were touching hers with the
solemn neighborhood of danger and distress.  The fragile creature who
was crying close to her--there might still be time to rescue her from
the misery of false incompatible bonds; and this moment was unlike any
other: she and Rosamond could never be together again with the same
thrilling consciousness of yesterday within them both.  She felt the
relation between them to be peculiar enough to give her a peculiar
influence, though she had no conception that the way in which her own
feelings were involved was fully known to Mrs. Lydgate.

It was a newer crisis in Rosamond's experience than even Dorothea could
imagine: she was under the first great shock that had shattered her
dream-world in which she had been easily confident of herself and
critical of others; and this strange unexpected manifestation of
feeling in a woman whom she had approached with a shrinking aversion
and dread, as one who must necessarily have a jealous hatred towards
her, made her soul totter all the more with a sense that she had been
walking in an unknown world which had just broken in upon her.

When Rosamond's convulsed throat was subsiding into calm, and she
withdrew the handkerchief with which she had been hiding her face, her
eyes met Dorothea's as helplessly as if they had been blue flowers.
What was the use of thinking about behavior after this crying?  And
Dorothea looked almost as childish, with the neglected trace of a
silent tear.  Pride was broken down between these two.

"We were talking about your husband," Dorothea said, with some
timidity.  "I thought his looks were sadly changed with suffering the
other day.  I had not seen him for many weeks before.  He said he had
been feeling very lonely in his trial; but I think he would have borne
it all better if he had been able to be quite open with you."

"Tertius is so angry and impatient if I say anything," said Rosamond,
imagining that he had been complaining of her to Dorothea.  "He ought
not to wonder that I object to speak to him on painful subjects."

"It was himself he blamed for not speaking," said Dorothea.  "What he
said of you was, that he could not be happy in doing anything which
made you unhappy--that his marriage was of course a bond which must
affect his choice about everything; and for that reason he refused my
proposal that he should keep his position at the Hospital, because that
would bind him to stay in Middlemarch, and he would not undertake to do
anything which would be painful to you.  He could say that to me,
because he knows that I had much trial in my marriage, from my
husband's illness, which hindered his plans and saddened him; and he
knows that I have felt how hard it is to walk always in fear of hurting
another who is tied to us."

Dorothea waited a little; she had discerned a faint pleasure stealing
over Rosamond's face.  But there was no answer, and she went on, with a
gathering tremor, "Marriage is so unlike everything else.  There is
something even awful in the nearness it brings.  Even if we loved some
one else better than--than those we were married to, it would be no
use"--poor Dorothea, in her palpitating anxiety, could only seize her
language brokenly--"I mean, marriage drinks up all our power of giving
or getting any blessedness in that sort of love.  I know it may be very
dear--but it murders our marriage--and then the marriage stays with us
like a murder--and everything else is gone.  And then our husband--if
he loved and trusted us, and we have not helped him, but made a curse
in his life--"

Her voice had sunk very low: there was a dread upon her of presuming
too far, and of speaking as if she herself were perfection addressing
error.  She was too much preoccupied with her own anxiety, to be aware
that Rosamond was trembling too; and filled with the need to express
pitying fellowship rather than rebuke, she put her hands on Rosamond's,
and said with more agitated rapidity,--"I know, I know that the feeling
may be very dear--it has taken hold of us unawares--it is so hard, it
may seem like death to part with it--and we are weak--I am weak--"

The waves of her own sorrow, from out of which she was struggling to
save another, rushed over Dorothea with conquering force.  She stopped
in speechless agitation, not crying, but feeling as if she were being
inwardly grappled.  Her face had become of a deathlier paleness, her
lips trembled, and she pressed her hands helplessly on the hands that
lay under them.

Rosamond, taken hold of by an emotion stronger than her own--hurried
along in a new movement which gave all things some new, awful,
undefined aspect--could find no words, but involuntarily she put her
lips to Dorothea's forehead which was very near her, and then for a
minute the two women clasped each other as if they had been in a
shipwreck.

"You are thinking what is not true," said Rosamond, in an eager
half-whisper, while she was still feeling Dorothea's arms round
her--urged by a mysterious necessity to free herself from something
that oppressed her as if it were blood guiltiness.

They moved apart, looking at each other.

"When you came in yesterday--it was not as you thought," said Rosamond
in the same tone.

There was a movement of surprised attention in Dorothea.  She expected
a vindication of Rosamond herself.

"He was telling me how he loved another woman, that I might know he
could never love me," said Rosamond, getting more and more hurried as
she went on.  "And now I think he hates me because--because you
mistook him yesterday.  He says it is through me that you will think
ill of him--think that he is a false person.  But it shall not be
through me.  He has never had any love for me--I know he has not--he
has always thought slightly of me.  He said yesterday that no other
woman existed for him beside you.  The blame of what happened is
entirely mine.  He said he could never explain to you--because of me.
He said you could never think well of him again.  But now I have told
you, and he cannot reproach me any more."

Rosamond had delivered her soul under impulses which she had not known
before.  She had begun her confession under the subduing influence of
Dorothea's emotion; and as she went on she had gathered the sense that
she was repelling Will's reproaches, which were still like a
knife-wound within her.

The revulsion of feeling in Dorothea was too strong to be called joy.
It was a tumult in which the terrible strain of the night and morning
made a resistant pain:--she could only perceive that this would be joy
when she had recovered her power of feeling it.  Her immediate
consciousness was one of immense sympathy without check; she cared for
Rosamond without struggle now, and responded earnestly to her last
words--

"No, he cannot reproach you any more."

With her usual tendency to over-estimate the good in others, she felt a
great outgoing of her heart towards Rosamond, for the generous effort
which had redeemed her from suffering, not counting that the effort was
a reflex of her own energy.  After they had been silent a little, she
said--

"You are not sorry that I came this morning?"

"No, you have been very good to me," said Rosamond.  "I did not think
that you would be so good.  I was very unhappy.  I am not happy now.
Everything is so sad."

"But better days will come.  Your husband will be rightly valued.  And
he depends on you for comfort.  He loves you best.  The worst loss
would be to lose that--and you have not lost it," said Dorothea.

She tried to thrust away the too overpowering thought of her own
relief, lest she should fail to win some sign that Rosamond's affection
was yearning back towards her husband.

"Tertius did not find fault with me, then?" said Rosamond,
understanding now that Lydgate might have said anything to Mrs.
Casaubon, and that she certainly was different from other women.
Perhaps there was a faint taste of jealousy in the question.  A smile
began to play over Dorothea's face as she said--

"No, indeed!  How could you imagine it?"  But here the door opened, and
Lydgate entered.

"I am come back in my quality of doctor," he said.  "After I went away,
I was haunted by two pale faces: Mrs. Casaubon looked as much in need
of care as you, Rosy.  And I thought that I had not done my duty in
leaving you together; so when I had been to Coleman's I came home
again.  I noticed that you were walking, Mrs. Casaubon, and the sky has
changed--I think we may have rain.  May I send some one to order your
carriage to come for you?"

"Oh, no!  I am strong: I need the walk," said Dorothea, rising with
animation in her face.  "Mrs. Lydgate and I have chatted a great deal,
and it is time for me to go.  I have always been accused of being
immoderate and saying too much."

She put out her hand to Rosamond, and they said an earnest, quiet
good-by without kiss or other show of effusion: there had been between
them too much serious emotion for them to use the signs of it
superficially.

As Lydgate took her to the door she said nothing of Rosamond, but told
him of Mr. Farebrother and the other friends who had listened with
belief to his story.

When he came back to Rosamond, she had already thrown herself on the
sofa, in resigned fatigue.

"Well, Rosy," he said, standing over her, and touching her hair, "what
do you think of Mrs. Casaubon now you have seen so much of her?"

"I think she must be better than any one," said Rosamond, "and she is
very beautiful.  If you go to talk to her so often, you will be more
discontented with me than ever!"

Lydgate laughed at the "so often."  "But has she made you any less
discontented with me?"

"I think she has," said Rosamond, looking up in his face.  "How heavy
your eyes are, Tertius--and do push your hair back." He lifted up his
large white hand to obey her, and felt thankful for this little mark of
interest in him.  Poor Rosamond's vagrant fancy had come back terribly
scourged--meek enough to nestle under the old despised shelter.  And
the shelter was still there: Lydgate had accepted his narrowed lot with
sad resignation.  He had chosen this fragile creature, and had taken
the burthen of her life upon his arms.  He must walk as he could,
carrying that burthen pitifully.



CHAPTER LXXXII.

    "My grief lies onward and my joy behind."
                                  --SHAKESPEARE: Sonnets.


Exiles notoriously feed much on hopes, and are unlikely to stay in
banishment unless they are obliged.  When Will Ladislaw exiled himself
from Middlemarch he had placed no stronger obstacle to his return than
his own resolve, which was by no means an iron barrier, but simply a
state of mind liable to melt into a minuet with other states of mind,
and to find itself bowing, smiling, and giving place with polite
facility.  As the months went on, it had seemed more and more difficult
to him to say why he should not run down to Middlemarch--merely for the
sake of hearing something about Dorothea; and if on such a flying visit
he should chance by some strange coincidence to meet with her, there
was no reason for him to be ashamed of having taken an innocent journey
which he had beforehand supposed that he should not take.  Since he was
hopelessly divided from her, he might surely venture into her
neighborhood; and as to the suspicious friends who kept a dragon watch
over her--their opinions seemed less and less important with time and
change of air.

And there had come a reason quite irrespective of Dorothea, which
seemed to make a journey to Middlemarch a sort of philanthropic duty.
Will had given a disinterested attention to an intended settlement on a
new plan in the Far West, and the need for funds in order to carry out
a good design had set him on debating with himself whether it would not
be a laudable use to make of his claim on Bulstrode, to urge the
application of that money which had been offered to himself as a means
of carrying out a scheme likely to be largely beneficial.  The question
seemed a very dubious one to Will, and his repugnance to again entering
into any relation with the banker might have made him dismiss it
quickly, if there had not arisen in his imagination the probability
that his judgment might be more safely determined by a visit to
Middlemarch.

That was the object which Will stated to himself as a reason for coming
down.  He had meant to confide in Lydgate, and discuss the money
question with him, and he had meant to amuse himself for the few
evenings of his stay by having a great deal of music and badinage with
fair Rosamond, without neglecting his friends at Lowick Parsonage:--if
the Parsonage was close to the Manor, that was no fault of his.  He had
neglected the Farebrothers before his departure, from a proud
resistance to the possible accusation of indirectly seeking interviews
with Dorothea; but hunger tames us, and Will had become very hungry for
the vision of a certain form and the sound of a certain voice.
Nothing, had done instead--not the opera, or the converse of zealous
politicians, or the flattering reception (in dim corners) of his new
hand in leading articles.

Thus he had come down, foreseeing with confidence how almost everything
would be in his familiar little world; fearing, indeed, that there
would be no surprises in his visit.  But he had found that humdrum
world in a terribly dynamic condition, in which even badinage and
lyrism had turned explosive; and the first day of this visit had become
the most fatal epoch of his life.  The next morning he felt so harassed
with the nightmare of consequences--he dreaded so much the immediate
issues before him--that seeing while he breakfasted the arrival of the
Riverston coach, he went out hurriedly and took his place on it, that
he might be relieved, at least for a day, from the necessity of doing
or saying anything in Middlemarch.  Will Ladislaw was in one of those
tangled crises which are commoner in experience than one might imagine,
from the shallow absoluteness of men's judgments.  He had found
Lydgate, for whom he had the sincerest respect, under circumstances
which claimed his thorough and frankly declared sympathy; and the
reason why, in spite of that claim, it would have been better for Will
to have avoided all further intimacy, or even contact, with Lydgate,
was precisely of the kind to make such a course appear impossible.  To
a creature of Will's susceptible temperament--without any neutral
region of indifference in his nature, ready to turn everything that
befell him into the collisions of a passionate drama--the revelation
that Rosamond had made her happiness in any way dependent on him was a
difficulty which his outburst of rage towards her had immeasurably
increased for him.  He hated his own cruelty, and yet he dreaded to
show the fulness of his relenting: he must go to her again; the
friendship could not be put to a sudden end; and her unhappiness was a
power which he dreaded.  And all the while there was no more foretaste
of enjoyment in the life before him than if his limbs had been lopped
off and he was making his fresh start on crutches.  In the night he had
debated whether he should not get on the coach, not for Riverston, but
for London, leaving a note to Lydgate which would give a makeshift
reason for his retreat.  But there were strong cords pulling him back
from that abrupt departure: the blight on his happiness in thinking of
Dorothea, the crushing of that chief hope which had remained in spite
of the acknowledged necessity for renunciation, was too fresh a misery
for him to resign himself to it and go straightway into a distance
which was also despair.

Thus he did nothing more decided than taking the Riverston coach.  He
came back again by it while it was still daylight, having made up his
mind that he must go to Lydgate's that evening.  The Rubicon, we know,
was a very insignificant stream to look at; its significance lay
entirely in certain invisible conditions.  Will felt as if he were
forced to cross his small boundary ditch, and what he saw beyond it was
not empire, but discontented subjection.

But it is given to us sometimes even in our every-day life to witness
the saving influence of a noble nature, the divine efficacy of rescue
that may lie in a self-subduing act of fellowship.  If Dorothea, after
her night's anguish, had not taken that walk to Rosamond--why, she
perhaps would have been a woman who gained a higher character for
discretion, but it would certainly not have been as well for those
three who were on one hearth in Lydgate's house at half-past seven that
evening.

Rosamond had been prepared for Will's visit, and she received him with
a languid coldness which Lydgate accounted for by her nervous
exhaustion, of which he could not suppose that it had any relation to
Will.  And when she sat in silence bending over a bit of work, he
innocently apologized for her in an indirect way by begging her to lean
backward and rest.  Will was miserable in the necessity for playing the
part of a friend who was making his first appearance and greeting to
Rosamond, while his thoughts were busy about her feeling since that
scene of yesterday, which seemed still inexorably to enclose them both,
like the painful vision of a double madness.  It happened that nothing
called Lydgate out of the room; but when Rosamond poured out the tea,
and Will came near to fetch it, she placed a tiny bit of folded paper
in his saucer.  He saw it and secured it quickly, but as he went back
to his inn he had no eagerness to unfold the paper.  What Rosamond had
written to him would probably deepen the painful impressions of the
evening.  Still, he opened and read it by his bed-candle. There were
only these few words in her neatly flowing hand:--

"I have told Mrs. Casaubon.  She is not under any mistake about you.  I
told her because she came to see me and was very kind.  You will have
nothing to reproach me with now.  I shall not have made any difference
to you."

The effect of these words was not quite all gladness.  As Will dwelt on
them with excited imagination, he felt his cheeks and ears burning at
the thought of what had occurred between Dorothea and Rosamond--at the
uncertainty how far Dorothea might still feel her dignity wounded in
having an explanation of his conduct offered to her.  There might still
remain in her mind a changed association with him which made an
irremediable difference--a lasting flaw.  With active fancy he wrought
himself into a state of doubt little more easy than that of the man who
has escaped from wreck by night and stands on unknown ground in the
darkness.  Until that wretched yesterday--except the moment of
vexation long ago in the very same room and in the very same
presence--all their vision, all their thought of each other, had been
as in a world apart, where the sunshine fell on tall white lilies,
where no evil lurked, and no other soul entered.  But now--would
Dorothea meet him in that world again?



CHAPTER LXXXIII.

    "And now good-morrow to our waking souls
     Which watch not one another out of fear;
     For love all love of other sights controls,
     And makes one little room, an everywhere."
                                       --DR. DONNE.


On the second morning after Dorothea's visit to Rosamond, she had had
two nights of sound sleep, and had not only lost all traces of fatigue,
but felt as if she had a great deal of superfluous strength--that is
to say, more strength than she could manage to concentrate on any
occupation.  The day before, she had taken long walks outside the
grounds, and had paid two visits to the Parsonage; but she never in her
life told any one the reason why she spent her time in that fruitless
manner, and this morning she was rather angry with herself for her
childish restlessness.  To-day was to be spent quite differently.  What
was there to be done in the village?  Oh dear! nothing.  Everybody was
well and had flannel; nobody's pig had died; and it was Saturday
morning, when there was a general scrubbing of doors and door-stones,
and when it was useless to go into the school.  But there were various
subjects that Dorothea was trying to get clear upon, and she resolved
to throw herself energetically into the gravest of all.  She sat down
in the library before her particular little heap of books on political
economy and kindred matters, out of which she was trying to get light
as to the best way of spending money so as not to injure one's
neighbors, or--what comes to the same thing--so as to do them the most
good.  Here was a weighty subject which, if she could but lay hold of
it, would certainly keep her mind steady.  Unhappily her mind slipped
off it for a whole hour; and at the end she found herself reading
sentences twice over with an intense consciousness of many things, but
not of any one thing contained in the text.  This was hopeless.  Should
she order the carriage and drive to Tipton?  No; for some reason or
other she preferred staying at Lowick.  But her vagrant mind must be
reduced to order: there was an art in self-discipline; and she walked
round and round the brown library considering by what sort of manoeuvre
she could arrest her wandering thoughts.  Perhaps a mere task was the
best means--something to which she must go doggedly.  Was there not the
geography of Asia Minor, in which her slackness had often been rebuked
by Mr. Casaubon?  She went to the cabinet of maps and unrolled one:
this morning she might make herself finally sure that Paphlagonia was
not on the Levantine coast, and fix her total darkness about the
Chalybes firmly on the shores of the Euxine.  A map was a fine thing to
study when you were disposed to think of something else, being made up
of names that would turn into a chime if you went back upon them.
Dorothea set earnestly to work, bending close to her map, and uttering
the names in an audible, subdued tone, which often got into a chime.
She looked amusingly girlish after all her deep experience--nodding
her head and marking the names off on her fingers, with a little
pursing of her lip, and now and then breaking off to put her hands on
each side of her face and say, "Oh dear!  oh dear!"

There was no reason why this should end any more than a merry-go-round;
but it was at last interrupted by the opening of the door and the
announcement of Miss Noble.

The little old lady, whose bonnet hardly reached Dorothea's shoulder,
was warmly welcomed, but while her hand was being pressed she made many
of her beaver-like noises, as if she had something difficult to say.

"Do sit down," said Dorothea, rolling a chair forward.  "Am I wanted
for anything?  I shall be so glad if I can do anything."

"I will not stay," said Miss Noble, putting her hand into her small
basket, and holding some article inside it nervously; "I have left a
friend in the churchyard."  She lapsed into her inarticulate sounds,
and unconsciously drew forth the article which she was fingering.  It
was the tortoise-shell lozenge-box, and Dorothea felt the color
mounting to her cheeks.

"Mr. Ladislaw," continued the timid little woman.  "He fears he has
offended you, and has begged me to ask if you will see him for a few
minutes."

Dorothea did not answer on the instant: it was crossing her mind that
she could not receive him in this library, where her husband's
prohibition seemed to dwell.  She looked towards the window.  Could she
go out and meet him in the grounds?  The sky was heavy, and the trees
had begun to shiver as at a coming storm.  Besides, she shrank from
going out to him.

"Do see him, Mrs. Casaubon," said Miss Noble, pathetically; "else I
must go back and say No, and that will hurt him."

"Yes, I will see him," said Dorothea.  "Pray tell him to come."

What else was there to be done?  There was nothing that she longed for
at that moment except to see Will: the possibility of seeing him had
thrust itself insistently between her and every other object; and yet
she had a throbbing excitement like an alarm upon her--a sense that
she was doing something daringly defiant for his sake.

When the little lady had trotted away on her mission, Dorothea stood in
the middle of the library with her hands falling clasped before her,
making no attempt to compose herself in an attitude of dignified
unconsciousness.  What she was least conscious of just then was her own
body: she was thinking of what was likely to be in Will's mind, and of
the hard feelings that others had had about him.  How could any duty
bind her to hardness?  Resistance to unjust dispraise had mingled with
her feeling for him from the very first, and now in the rebound of her
heart after her anguish the resistance was stronger than ever.  "If I
love him too much it is because he has been used so ill:"--there was a
voice within her saying this to some imagined audience in the library,
when the door was opened, and she saw Will before her.

She did not move, and he came towards her with more doubt and timidity
in his face than she had ever seen before.  He was in a state of
uncertainty which made him afraid lest some look or word of his should
condemn him to a new distance from her; and Dorothea was afraid of her
_own_ emotion.  She looked as if there were a spell upon her, keeping
her motionless and hindering her from unclasping her hands, while some
intense, grave yearning was imprisoned within her eyes.  Seeing that
she did not put out her hand as usual, Will paused a yard from her and
said with embarrassment, "I am so grateful to you for seeing me."

"I wanted to see you," said Dorothea, having no other words at command.
It did not occur to her to sit down, and Will did not give a cheerful
interpretation to this queenly way of receiving him; but he went on to
say what he had made up his mind to say.

"I fear you think me foolish and perhaps wrong for coming back so soon.
I have been punished for my impatience.  You know--every one knows
now--a painful story about my parentage.  I knew of it before I went
away, and I always meant to tell you of it if--if we ever met again."

There was a slight movement in Dorothea, and she unclasped her hands,
but immediately folded them over each other.

"But the affair is matter of gossip now," Will continued.  "I wished
you to know that something connected with it--something which happened
before I went away, helped to bring me down here again.  At least I
thought it excused my coming.  It was the idea of getting Bulstrode to
apply some money to a public purpose--some money which he had thought
of giving me.  Perhaps it is rather to Bulstrode's credit that he
privately offered me compensation for an old injury: he offered to give
me a good income to make amends; but I suppose you know the
disagreeable story?"

Will looked doubtfully at Dorothea, but his manner was gathering some
of the defiant courage with which he always thought of this fact in his
destiny.  He added, "You know that it must be altogether painful to me."

"Yes--yes--I know," said Dorothea, hastily.

"I did not choose to accept an income from such a source.  I was sure
that you would not think well of me if I did so," said Will.  Why
should he mind saying anything of that sort to her now?  She knew that
he had avowed his love for her.  "I felt that"--he broke off,
nevertheless.

"You acted as I should have expected you to act," said Dorothea, her
face brightening and her head becoming a little more erect on its
beautiful stem.

"I did not believe that you would let any circumstance of my birth
create a prejudice in you against me, though it was sure to do so in
others," said Will, shaking his head backward in his old way, and
looking with a grave appeal into her eyes.

"If it were a new hardship it would be a new reason for me to cling to
you," said Dorothea, fervidly.  "Nothing could have changed me but--"
her heart was swelling, and it was difficult to go on; she made a great
effort over herself to say in a low tremulous voice, "but thinking that
you were different--not so good as I had believed you to be."

"You are sure to believe me better than I am in everything but one,"
said Will, giving way to his own feeling in the evidence of hers.  "I
mean, in my truth to you.  When I thought you doubted of that, I didn't
care about anything that was left.  I thought it was all over with me,
and there was nothing to try for--only things to endure."

"I don't doubt you any longer," said Dorothea, putting out her hand; a
vague fear for him impelling her unutterable affection.

He took her hand and raised it to his lips with something like a sob.
But he stood with his hat and gloves in the other hand, and might have
done for the portrait of a Royalist.  Still it was difficult to loose
the hand, and Dorothea, withdrawing it in a confusion that distressed
her, looked and moved away.

"See how dark the clouds have become, and how the trees are tossed,"
she said, walking towards the window, yet speaking and moving with only
a dim sense of what she was doing.

Will followed her at a little distance, and leaned against the tall
back of a leather chair, on which he ventured now to lay his hat and
gloves, and free himself from the intolerable durance of formality to
which he had been for the first time condemned in Dorothea's presence.
It must be confessed that he felt very happy at that moment leaning on
the chair.  He was not much afraid of anything that she might feel now.

They stood silent, not looking at each other, but looking at the
evergreens which were being tossed, and were showing the pale underside
of their leaves against the blackening sky.  Will never enjoyed the
prospect of a storm so much: it delivered him from the necessity of
going away.  Leaves and little branches were hurled about, and the
thunder was getting nearer.  The light was more and more sombre, but
there came a flash of lightning which made them start and look at each
other, and then smile.  Dorothea began to say what she had been
thinking of.

"That was a wrong thing for you to say, that you would have had nothing
to try for.  If we had lost our own chief good, other people's good
would remain, and that is worth trying for.  Some can be happy.  I
seemed to see that more clearly than ever, when I was the most
wretched.  I can hardly think how I could have borne the trouble, if
that feeling had not come to me to make strength."

"You have never felt the sort of misery I felt," said Will; "the misery
of knowing that you must despise me."

"But I have felt worse--it was worse to think ill--" Dorothea had begun
impetuously, but broke off.

Will colored.  He had the sense that whatever she said was uttered in
the vision of a fatality that kept them apart.  He was silent a moment,
and then said passionately--

"We may at least have the comfort of speaking to each other without
disguise.  Since I must go away--since we must always be divided--you
may think of me as one on the brink of the grave."

While he was speaking there came a vivid flash of lightning which lit
each of them up for the other--and the light seemed to be the terror of
a hopeless love.  Dorothea darted instantaneously from the window; Will
followed her, seizing her hand with a spasmodic movement; and so they
stood, with their hands clasped, like two children, looking out on the
storm, while the thunder gave a tremendous crack and roll above them,
and the rain began to pour down.  Then they turned their faces towards
each other, with the memory of his last words in them, and they did not
loose each other's hands.

"There is no hope for me," said Will.  "Even if you loved me as well as
I love you--even if I were everything to you--I shall most likely
always be very poor: on a sober calculation, one can count on nothing
but a creeping lot.  It is impossible for us ever to belong to each
other.  It is perhaps base of me to have asked for a word from you.  I
meant to go away into silence, but I have not been able to do what I
meant."

"Don't be sorry," said Dorothea, in her clear tender tones.  "I would
rather share all the trouble of our parting."

Her lips trembled, and so did his.  It was never known which lips were
the first to move towards the other lips; but they kissed tremblingly,
and then they moved apart.

The rain was dashing against the window-panes as if an angry spirit
were within it, and behind it was the great swoop of the wind; it was
one of those moments in which both the busy and the idle pause with a
certain awe.

Dorothea sat down on the seat nearest to her, a long low ottoman in the
middle of the room, and with her hands folded over each other on her
lap, looked at the drear outer world.  Will stood still an instant
looking at her, then seated himself beside her, and laid his hand on
hers, which turned itself upward to be clasped.  They sat in that way
without looking at each other, until the rain abated and began to fall
in stillness.  Each had been full of thoughts which neither of them
could begin to utter.

But when the rain was quiet, Dorothea turned to look at Will.  With
passionate exclamation, as if some torture screw were threatening him,
he started up and said, "It is impossible!"

He went and leaned on the back of the chair again, and seemed to be
battling with his own anger, while she looked towards him sadly.

"It is as fatal as a murder or any other horror that divides people,"
he burst out again; "it is more intolerable--to have our life maimed by
petty accidents."

"No--don't say that--your life need not be maimed," said Dorothea,
gently.

"Yes, it must," said Will, angrily.  "It is cruel of you to speak in
that way--as if there were any comfort.  You may see beyond the misery
of it, but I don't. It is unkind--it is throwing back my love for you
as if it were a trifle, to speak in that way in the face of the fact.
We can never be married."

"Some time--we might," said Dorothea, in a trembling voice.

"When?" said Will, bitterly.  "What is the use of counting on any
success of mine?  It is a mere toss up whether I shall ever do more
than keep myself decently, unless I choose to sell myself as a mere pen
and a mouthpiece.  I can see that clearly enough.  I could not offer
myself to any woman, even if she had no luxuries to renounce."

There was silence.  Dorothea's heart was full of something that she
wanted to say, and yet the words were too difficult.  She was wholly
possessed by them: at that moment debate was mute within her.  And it
was very hard that she could not say what she wanted to say.  Will was
looking out of the window angrily.  If he would have looked at her and
not gone away from her side, she thought everything would have been
easier.  At last he turned, still resting against the chair, and
stretching his hand automatically towards his hat, said with a sort of
exasperation, "Good-by."

"Oh, I cannot bear it--my heart will break," said Dorothea, starting
from her seat, the flood of her young passion bearing down all the
obstructions which had kept her silent--the great tears rising and
falling in an instant: "I don't mind about poverty--I hate my wealth."

In an instant Will was close to her and had his arms round her, but she
drew her head back and held his away gently that she might go on
speaking, her large tear-filled eyes looking at his very simply, while
she said in a sobbing childlike way, "We could live quite well on my
own fortune--it is too much--seven hundred a-year--I want so little--no
new clothes--and I will learn what everything costs."



CHAPTER LXXXIV.

    "Though it be songe of old and yonge,
         That I sholde be to blame,
     Theyrs be the charge, that spoke so large
         In hurtynge of my name."
                           --The Not-Browne Mayde.


It was just after the Lords had thrown out the Reform Bill: that
explains how Mr. Cadwallader came to be walking on the slope of the
lawn near the great conservatory at Freshitt Hall, holding the "Times"
in his hands behind him, while he talked with a trout-fisher's
dispassionateness about the prospects of the country to Sir James
Chettam.  Mrs. Cadwallader, the Dowager Lady Chettam, and Celia were
sometimes seated on garden-chairs, sometimes walking to meet little
Arthur, who was being drawn in his chariot, and, as became the
infantine Bouddha, was sheltered by his sacred umbrella with handsome
silken fringe.

The ladies also talked politics, though more fitfully.  Mrs.
Cadwallader was strong on the intended creation of peers: she had it
for certain from her cousin that Truberry had gone over to the other
side entirely at the instigation of his wife, who had scented peerages
in the air from the very first introduction of the Reform question, and
would sign her soul away to take precedence of her younger sister, who
had married a baronet.  Lady Chettam thought that such conduct was very
reprehensible, and remembered that Mrs. Truberry's mother was a Miss
Walsingham of Melspring.  Celia confessed it was nicer to be "Lady"
than "Mrs.," and that Dodo never minded about precedence if she could
have her own way.  Mrs. Cadwallader held that it was a poor
satisfaction to take precedence when everybody about you knew that you
had not a drop of good blood in your veins; and Celia again, stopping
to look at Arthur, said, "It would be very nice, though, if he were a
Viscount--and his lordship's little tooth coming through!  He might
have been, if James had been an Earl."

"My dear Celia," said the Dowager, "James's title is worth far more
than any new earldom.  I never wished his father to be anything else
than Sir James."

"Oh, I only meant about Arthur's little tooth," said Celia,
comfortably.  "But see, here is my uncle coming."

She tripped off to meet her uncle, while Sir James and Mr. Cadwallader
came forward to make one group with the ladies.  Celia had slipped her
arm through her uncle's, and he patted her hand with a rather
melancholy "Well, my dear!"  As they approached, it was evident that
Mr. Brooke was looking dejected, but this was fully accounted for by
the state of politics; and as he was shaking hands all round without
more greeting than a "Well, you're all here, you know," the Rector
said, laughingly--

"Don't take the throwing out of the Bill so much to heart, Brooke;
you've got all the riff-raff of the country on your side."

"The Bill, eh? ah!" said Mr. Brooke, with a mild distractedness of
manner.  "Thrown out, you know, eh?  The Lords are going too far,
though.  They'll have to pull up.  Sad news, you know.  I mean, here at
home--sad news.  But you must not blame me, Chettam."

"What is the matter?" said Sir James.  "Not another gamekeeper shot, I
hope?  It's what I should expect, when a fellow like Trapping Bass is
let off so easily."

"Gamekeeper?  No. Let us go in; I can tell you all in the house, you
know," said Mr. Brooke, nodding at the Cadwalladers, to show that he
included them in his confidence.  "As to poachers like Trapping Bass,
you know, Chettam," he continued, as they were entering, "when you are
a magistrate, you'll not find it so easy to commit.  Severity is all
very well, but it's a great deal easier when you've got somebody to do
it for you.  You have a soft place in your heart yourself, you
know--you're not a Draco, a Jeffreys, that sort of thing."

Mr. Brooke was evidently in a state of nervous perturbation.  When he
had something painful to tell, it was usually his way to introduce it
among a number of disjointed particulars, as if it were a medicine that
would get a milder flavor by mixing.  He continued his chat with Sir
James about the poachers until they were all seated, and Mrs.
Cadwallader, impatient of this drivelling, said--

"I'm dying to know the sad news.  The gamekeeper is not shot: that is
settled.  What is it, then?"

"Well, it's a very trying thing, you know," said Mr. Brooke.  "I'm glad
you and the Rector are here; it's a family matter--but you will help
us all to bear it, Cadwallader.  I've got to break it to you, my dear."
Here Mr. Brooke looked at Celia--"You've no notion what it is, you
know.  And, Chettam, it will annoy you uncommonly--but, you see, you
have not been able to hinder it, any more than I have.  There's
something singular in things: they come round, you know."

"It must be about Dodo," said Celia, who had been used to think of her
sister as the dangerous part of the family machinery.  She had seated
herself on a low stool against her husband's knee.

"For God's sake let us hear what it is!" said Sir James.

"Well, you know, Chettam, I couldn't help Casaubon's will: it was a
sort of will to make things worse."

"Exactly," said Sir James, hastily.  "But _what_ is worse?"

"Dorothea is going to be married again, you know," said Mr. Brooke,
nodding towards Celia, who immediately looked up at her husband with a
frightened glance, and put her hand on his knee.  Sir James was almost
white with anger, but he did not speak.

"Merciful heaven!" said Mrs. Cadwallader.  "Not to _young_ Ladislaw?"

Mr. Brooke nodded, saying, "Yes; to Ladislaw," and then fell into a
prudential silence.

"You see, Humphrey!" said Mrs. Cadwallader, waving her arm towards her
husband.  "Another time you will admit that I have some foresight; or
rather you will contradict me and be just as blind as ever.  _You_
supposed that the young gentleman was gone out of the country."

"So he might be, and yet come back," said the Rector, quietly

"When did you learn this?" said Sir James, not liking to hear any one
else speak, though finding it difficult to speak himself.

"Yesterday," said Mr. Brooke, meekly.  "I went to Lowick.  Dorothea
sent for me, you know.  It had come about quite suddenly--neither of
them had any idea two days ago--not any idea, you know.  There's
something singular in things.  But Dorothea is quite determined--it is
no use opposing.  I put it strongly to her.  I did my duty, Chettam.
But she can act as she likes, you know."

"It would have been better if I had called him out and shot him a year
ago," said Sir James, not from bloody-mindedness, but because he needed
something strong to say.

"Really, James, that would have been very disagreeable," said Celia.

"Be reasonable, Chettam.  Look at the affair more quietly," said Mr.
Cadwallader, sorry to see his good-natured friend so overmastered by
anger.

"That is not so very easy for a man of any dignity--with any sense of
right--when the affair happens to be in his own family," said Sir
James, still in his white indignation.  "It is perfectly scandalous.
If Ladislaw had had a spark of honor he would have gone out of the
country at once, and never shown his face in it again.  However, I am
not surprised.  The day after Casaubon's funeral I said what ought to
be done.  But I was not listened to."

"You wanted what was impossible, you know, Chettam," said Mr. Brooke.
"You wanted him shipped off.  I told you Ladislaw was not to be done as
we liked with: he had his ideas.  He was a remarkable fellow--I always
said he was a remarkable fellow."

"Yes," said Sir James, unable to repress a retort, "it is rather a pity
you formed that high opinion of him.  We are indebted to that for his
being lodged in this neighborhood.  We are indebted to that for seeing
a woman like Dorothea degrading herself by marrying him." Sir James
made little stoppages between his clauses, the words not coming easily.
"A man so marked out by her husband's will, that delicacy ought to have
forbidden her from seeing him again--who takes her out of her proper
rank--into poverty--has the meanness to accept such a sacrifice--has
always had an objectionable position--a bad origin--and, I _believe_,
is a man of little principle and light character.  That is my opinion."
Sir James ended emphatically, turning aside and crossing his leg.

"I pointed everything out to her," said Mr. Brooke, apologetically--"I
mean the poverty, and abandoning her position.  I said, 'My dear, you
don't know what it is to live on seven hundred a-year, and have no
carriage, and that kind of thing, and go amongst people who don't know
who you are.'  I put it strongly to her.  But I advise you to talk to
Dorothea herself.  The fact is, she has a dislike to Casaubon's
property.  You will hear what she says, you know."

"No--excuse me--I shall not," said Sir James, with more coolness.  "I
cannot bear to see her again; it is too painful.  It hurts me too much
that a woman like Dorothea should have done what is wrong."

"Be just, Chettam," said the easy, large-lipped Rector, who objected to
all this unnecessary discomfort.  "Mrs. Casaubon may be acting
imprudently: she is giving up a fortune for the sake of a man, and we
men have so poor an opinion of each other that we can hardly call a
woman wise who does that.  But I think you should not condemn it as a
wrong action, in the strict sense of the word."

"Yes, I do," answered Sir James.  "I think that Dorothea commits a
wrong action in marrying Ladislaw."

"My dear fellow, we are rather apt to consider an act wrong because it
is unpleasant to us," said the Rector, quietly.  Like many men who take
life easily, he had the knack of saying a home truth occasionally to
those who felt themselves virtuously out of temper.  Sir James took out
his handkerchief and began to bite the corner.

"It is very dreadful of Dodo, though," said Celia, wishing to justify
her husband.  "She said she _never would_ marry again--not anybody at
all."

"I heard her say the same thing myself," said Lady Chettam,
majestically, as if this were royal evidence.

"Oh, there is usually a silent exception in such cases," said Mrs.
Cadwallader.  "The only wonder to me is, that any of you are surprised.
You did nothing to hinder it.  If you would have had Lord Triton down
here to woo her with his philanthropy, he might have carried her off
before the year was over.  There was no safety in anything else.  Mr.
Casaubon had prepared all this as beautifully as possible.  He made
himself disagreeable--or it pleased God to make him so--and then he
dared her to contradict him.  It's the way to make any trumpery
tempting, to ticket it at a high price in that way."

"I don't know what you mean by wrong, Cadwallader," said Sir James,
still feeling a little stung, and turning round in his chair towards
the Rector.  "He's not a man we can take into the family.  At least, I
must speak for myself," he continued, carefully keeping his eyes off
Mr. Brooke.  "I suppose others will find his society too pleasant to
care about the propriety of the thing."

"Well, you know, Chettam," said Mr. Brooke, good-humoredly, nursing his
leg, "I can't turn my back on Dorothea.  I must be a father to her up
to a certain point.  I said, 'My dear, I won't refuse to give you
away.'  I had spoken strongly before.  But I can cut off the entail,
you know.  It will cost money and be troublesome; but I can do it, you
know."

Mr. Brooke nodded at Sir James, and felt that he was both showing his
own force of resolution and propitiating what was just in the Baronet's
vexation.  He had hit on a more ingenious mode of parrying than he was
aware of.  He had touched a motive of which Sir James was ashamed.  The
mass of his feeling about Dorothea's marriage to Ladislaw was due
partly to excusable prejudice, or even justifiable opinion, partly to a
jealous repugnance hardly less in Ladislaw's case than in Casaubon's.
He was convinced that the marriage was a fatal one for Dorothea.  But
amid that mass ran a vein of which he was too good and honorable a man
to like the avowal even to himself: it was undeniable that the union of
the two estates--Tipton and Freshitt--lying charmingly within a
ring-fence, was a prospect that flattered him for his son and heir.
Hence when Mr. Brooke noddingly appealed to that motive, Sir James felt
a sudden embarrassment; there was a stoppage in his throat; he even
blushed.  He had found more words than usual in the first jet of his
anger, but Mr. Brooke's propitiation was more clogging to his tongue
than Mr. Cadwallader's caustic hint.

But Celia was glad to have room for speech after her uncle's suggestion
of the marriage ceremony, and she said, though with as little eagerness
of manner as if the question had turned on an invitation to dinner, "Do
you mean that Dodo is going to be married directly, uncle?"

"In three weeks, you know," said Mr. Brooke, helplessly.  "I can do
nothing to hinder it, Cadwallader," he added, turning for a little
countenance toward the Rector, who said--

"--I--should not make any fuss about it.  If she likes to be poor, that
is her affair.  Nobody would have said anything if she had married the
young fellow because he was rich.  Plenty of beneficed clergy are
poorer than they will be.  Here is Elinor," continued the provoking
husband; "she vexed her friends by me: I had hardly a thousand
a-year--I was a lout--nobody could see anything in me--my shoes were
not the right cut--all the men wondered how a woman could like me.
Upon my word, I must take Ladislaw's part until I hear more harm of
him."

"Humphrey, that is all sophistry, and you know it," said his wife.
"Everything is all one--that is the beginning and end with you.  As if
you had not been a Cadwallader!  Does any one suppose that I would have
taken such a monster as you by any other name?"

"And a clergyman too," observed Lady Chettam with approbation.  "Elinor
cannot be said to have descended below her rank.  It is difficult to
say what Mr. Ladislaw is, eh, James?"

Sir James gave a small grunt, which was less respectful than his usual
mode of answering his mother.  Celia looked up at him like a thoughtful
kitten.

"It must be admitted that his blood is a frightful mixture!" said Mrs.
Cadwallader.  "The Casaubon cuttle-fish fluid to begin with, and then a
rebellious Polish fiddler or dancing-master, was it?--and then an old
clo--"

"Nonsense, Elinor," said the Rector, rising.  "It is time for us to go."

"After all, he is a pretty sprig," said Mrs. Cadwallader, rising too,
and wishing to make amends.  "He is like the fine old Crichley
portraits before the idiots came in."

"I'll go with you," said Mr. Brooke, starting up with alacrity.  "You
must all come and dine with me to-morrow, you know--eh, Celia, my dear?"

"You will, James--won't you?" said Celia, taking her husband's hand.

"Oh, of course, if you like," said Sir James, pulling down his
waistcoat, but unable yet to adjust his face good-humoredly. "That is
to say, if it is not to meet anybody else.':

"No, no, no," said Mr. Brooke, understanding the condition.  "Dorothea
would not come, you know, unless you had been to see her."

When Sir James and Celia were alone, she said, "Do you mind about my
having the carriage to go to Lowick, James?"

"What, now, directly?" he answered, with some surprise.

"Yes, it is very important," said Celia.

"Remember, Celia, I cannot see her," said Sir James.

"Not if she gave up marrying?"

"What is the use of saying that?--however, I'm going to the stables.
I'll tell Briggs to bring the carriage round."

Celia thought it was of great use, if not to say that, at least to take
a journey to Lowick in order to influence Dorothea's mind.  All through
their girlhood she had felt that she could act on her sister by a word
judiciously placed--by opening a little window for the daylight of her
own understanding to enter among the strange colored lamps by which
Dodo habitually saw.  And Celia the matron naturally felt more able to
advise her childless sister.  How could any one understand Dodo so well
as Celia did or love her so tenderly?

Dorothea, busy in her boudoir, felt a glow of pleasure at the sight of
her sister so soon after the revelation of her intended marriage.  She
had prefigured to herself, even with exaggeration, the disgust of her
friends, and she had even feared that Celia might be kept aloof from
her.

"O Kitty, I am delighted to see you!" said Dorothea, putting her hands
on Celia's shoulders, and beaming on her.  "I almost thought you would
not come to me."

"I have not brought Arthur, because I was in a hurry," said Celia, and
they sat down on two small chairs opposite each other, with their knees
touching.

"You know, Dodo, it is very bad," said Celia, in her placid guttural,
looking as prettily free from humors as possible.  "You have
disappointed us all so.  And I can't think that it ever _will_ be--you
never can go and live in that way.  And then there are all your plans!
You never can have thought of that.  James would have taken any trouble
for you, and you might have gone on all your life doing what you liked."

"On the contrary, dear," said Dorothea, "I never could do anything that
I liked.  I have never carried out any plan yet."

"Because you always wanted things that wouldn't do.  But other plans
would have come.  And how can you marry Mr. Ladislaw, that we none of
us ever thought you _could_ marry?  It shocks James so dreadfully.  And
then it is all so different from what you have always been.  You would
have Mr. Casaubon because he had such a great soul, and was so and
dismal and learned; and now, to think of marrying Mr. Ladislaw, who has
got no estate or anything.  I suppose it is because you must be making
yourself uncomfortable in some way or other."

Dorothea laughed.

"Well, it is very serious, Dodo," said Celia, becoming more impressive.
"How will you live? and you will go away among queer people.  And I
shall never see you--and you won't mind about little Arthur--and I
thought you always would--"

Celia's rare tears had got into her eyes, and the corners of her mouth
were agitated.

"Dear Celia," said Dorothea, with tender gravity, "if you don't ever
see me, it will not be my fault."

"Yes, it will," said Celia, with the same touching distortion of her
small features.  "How can I come to you or have you with me when James
can't bear it?--that is because he thinks it is not right--he thinks
you are so wrong, Dodo.  But you always were wrong: only I can't help
loving you.  And nobody can think where you will live: where can you
go?"

"I am going to London," said Dorothea.

"How can you always live in a street?  And you will be so poor.  I
could give you half my things, only how can I, when I never see you?"

"Bless you, Kitty," said Dorothea, with gentle warmth.  "Take comfort:
perhaps James will forgive me some time."

"But it would be much better if you would not be married," said Celia,
drying her eyes, and returning to her argument; "then there would be
nothing uncomfortable.  And you would not do what nobody thought you
could do.  James always said you ought to be a queen; but this is not
at all being like a queen.  You know what mistakes you have always been
making, Dodo, and this is another.  Nobody thinks Mr. Ladislaw a proper
husband for you.  And you _said you_ would never be married again."

"It is quite true that I might be a wiser person, Celia," said
Dorothea, "and that I might have done something better, if I had been
better.  But this is what I am going to do.  I have promised to marry
Mr. Ladislaw; and I am going to marry him."

The tone in which Dorothea said this was a note that Celia had long
learned to recognize.  She was silent a few moments, and then said, as
if she had dismissed all contest, "Is he very fond of you, Dodo?"

"I hope so.  I am very fond of him."

"That is nice," said Celia, comfortably.  "Only I rather you had such a
sort of husband as James is, with a place very near, that I could drive
to."

Dorothea smiled, and Celia looked rather meditative.  Presently she
said, "I cannot think how it all came about." Celia thought it would be
pleasant to hear the story.

"I dare say not," said-Dorothea, pinching her sister's chin.  "If you
knew how it came about, it would not seem wonderful to you."

"Can't you tell me?" said Celia, settling her arms cozily.

"No, dear, you would have to feel with me, else you would never know."



CHAPTER LXXXV.

    "Then went the jury out whose names were Mr. Blindman, Mr.
    No-good, Mr. Malice, Mr. Love-lust, Mr. Live-loose, Mr.
    Heady, Mr. High-mind, Mr. Enmity, Mr. Liar, Mr. Cruelty, Mr.
    Hate-light, Mr. Implacable, who every one gave in his
    private verdict against him among themselves, and afterwards
    unanimously concluded to bring him in guilty before the
    judge. And first among themselves, Mr. Blindman, the
    foreman, said, I see clearly that this man is a heretic.
    Then said Mr. No-good, Away with such a fellow from the
    earth! Ay, said Mr. Malice, for I hate the very look of him.
    Then said Mr. Love-lust, I could never endure him. Nor I,
    said Mr. Live-loose; for he would be always condemning my
    way. Hang him, hang him, said Mr. Heady. A sorry scrub, said
    Mr. High-mind. My heart riseth against him, said Mr. Enmity.
    He is a rogue, said Mr. Liar. Hanging is too good for him,
    said Mr. Cruelty. Let us despatch him out of the way said
    Mr. Hate-light. Then said Mr. Implacable, Might I have all
    the world given me, I could not be reconciled to him;
    therefore let us forthwith bring him in guilty of death."
                                            --Pilgrim's Progress.


When immortal Bunyan makes his picture of the persecuting passions
bringing in their verdict of guilty, who pities Faithful?  That is a
rare and blessed lot which some greatest men have not attained, to know
ourselves guiltless before a condemning crowd--to be sure that what we
are denounced for is solely the good in us.  The pitiable lot is that
of the man who could not call himself a martyr even though he were to
persuade himself that the men who stoned him were but ugly passions
incarnate--who knows that he is stoned, not for professing the Right,
but for not being the man he professed to be.

This was the consciousness that Bulstrode was withering under while he
made his preparations for departing from Middlemarch, and going to end
his stricken life in that sad refuge, the indifference of new faces.
The duteous merciful constancy of his wife had delivered him from one
dread, but it could not hinder her presence from being still a tribunal
before which he shrank from confession and desired advocacy.  His
equivocations with himself about the death of Raffles had sustained the
conception of an Omniscience whom he prayed to, yet he had a terror
upon him which would not let him expose them to judgment by a full
confession to his wife: the acts which he had washed and diluted with
inward argument and motive, and for which it seemed comparatively easy
to win invisible pardon--what name would she call them by?  That she
should ever silently call his acts Murder was what he could not bear.
He felt shrouded by her doubt: he got strength to face her from the
sense that she could not yet feel warranted in pronouncing that worst
condemnation on him.  Some time, perhaps--when he was dying--he would
tell her all: in the deep shadow of that time, when she held his hand
in the gathering darkness, she might listen without recoiling from his
touch.  Perhaps: but concealment had been the habit of his life, and
the impulse to confession had no power against the dread of a deeper
humiliation.

He was full of timid care for his wife, not only because he deprecated
any harshness of judgment from her, but because he felt a deep distress
at the sight of her suffering.  She had sent her daughters away to
board at a school on the coast, that this crisis might be hidden from
them as far as possible.  Set free by their absence from the
intolerable necessity of accounting for her grief or of beholding their
frightened wonder, she could live unconstrainedly with the sorrow that
was every day streaking her hair with whiteness and making her eyelids
languid.

"Tell me anything that you would like to have me do, Harriet,"
Bulstrode had said to her; "I mean with regard to arrangements of
property.  It is my intention not to sell the land I possess in this
neighborhood, but to leave it to you as a safe provision.  If you have
any wish on such subjects, do not conceal it from me."

A few days afterwards, when she had returned from a visit to her
brother's, she began to speak to her husband on a subject which had for
some time been in her mind.

"I _should_ like to do something for my brother's family, Nicholas; and
I think we are bound to make some amends to Rosamond and her husband.
Walter says Mr. Lydgate must leave the town, and his practice is almost
good for nothing, and they have very little left to settle anywhere
with.  I would rather do without something for ourselves, to make some
amends to my poor brother's family."

Mrs. Bulstrode did not wish to go nearer to the facts than in the
phrase "make some amends;" knowing that her husband must understand
her.  He had a particular reason, which she was not aware of, for
wincing under her suggestion.  He hesitated before he said--

"It is not possible to carry out your wish in the way you propose, my
dear.  Mr. Lydgate has virtually rejected any further service from me.
He has returned the thousand pounds which I lent him.  Mrs. Casaubon
advanced him the sum for that purpose.  Here is his letter."

The letter seemed to cut Mrs. Bulstrode severely.  The mention of Mrs.
Casaubon's loan seemed a reflection of that public feeling which held
it a matter of course that every one would avoid a connection with her
husband.  She was silent for some time; and the tears fell one after
the other, her chin trembling as she wiped them away.  Bulstrode,
sitting opposite to her, ached at the sight of that grief-worn face,
which two months before had been bright and blooming.  It had aged to
keep sad company with his own withered features.  Urged into some
effort at comforting her, he said--

"There is another means, Harriet, by which I might do a service to your
brother's family, if you like to act in it.  And it would, I think, be
beneficial to you: it would be an advantageous way of managing the land
which I mean to be yours."

She looked attentive.

"Garth once thought of undertaking the management of Stone Court in
order to place your nephew Fred there.  The stock was to remain as it
is, and they were to pay a certain share of the profits instead of an
ordinary rent.  That would be a desirable beginning for the young man,
in conjunction with his employment under Garth.  Would it be a
satisfaction to you?"

"Yes, it would," said Mrs. Bulstrode, with some return of energy.
"Poor Walter is so cast down; I would try anything in my power to do
him some good before I go away.  We have always been brother and
sister."

"You must make the proposal to Garth yourself, Harriet," said Mr.
Bulstrode, not liking what he had to say, but desiring the end he had
in view, for other reasons besides the consolation of his wife.  "You
must state to him that the land is virtually yours, and that he need
have no transactions with me.  Communications can be made through
Standish.  I mention this, because Garth gave up being my agent.  I can
put into your hands a paper which he himself drew up, stating
conditions; and you can propose his renewed acceptance of them.  I
think it is not unlikely that he will accept when you propose the thing
for the sake of your nephew."



CHAPTER LXXXVI.

    "Le coeur se sature d'amour comme d'un sel divin qui le
    conserve; de la l'incorruptible adherence de ceux qui se
    sont aimes des l'aube de la vie, et la fraicheur des vielles
    amours prolonges. Il existe un embaumement d'amour. C'est de
    Daphnis et Chloe que sont faits Philemon et Baucis. Cette
    vieillesse la, ressemblance du soir avec l'aurore."
                    --VICTOR HUGO: L'homme qui rit.


Mrs. Garth, hearing Caleb enter the passage about tea-time, opened the
parlor-door and said, "There you are, Caleb.  Have you had your
dinner?"  (Mr. Garth's meals were much subordinated to "business.")

"Oh yes, a good dinner--cold mutton and I don't know what.  Where is
Mary?"

"In the garden with Letty, I think."

"Fred is not come yet?"

"No. Are you going out again without taking tea, Caleb?" said Mrs.
Garth, seeing that her absent-minded husband was putting on again the
hat which he had just taken off.

"No, no; I'm only going to Mary a minute."

Mary was in a grassy corner of the garden, where there was a swing
loftily hung between two pear-trees. She had a pink kerchief tied over
her head, making a little poke to shade her eyes from the level
sunbeams, while she was giving a glorious swing to Letty, who laughed
and screamed wildly.

Seeing her father, Mary left the swing and went to meet him, pushing
back the pink kerchief and smiling afar off at him with the involuntary
smile of loving pleasure.

"I came to look for you, Mary," said Mr. Garth.  "Let us walk about a
bit."

Mary knew quite well that her father had something particular to say:
his eyebrows made their pathetic angle, and there was a tender gravity
in his voice: these things had been signs to her when she was Letty's
age.  She put her arm within his, and they turned by the row of
nut-trees.

"It will be a sad while before you can be married, Mary," said her
father, not looking at her, but at the end of the stick which he held
in his other hand.

"Not a sad while, father--I mean to be merry," said Mary, laughingly.
"I have been single and merry for four-and-twenty years and more: I
suppose it will not be quite as long again as that."  Then, after a
little pause, she said, more gravely, bending her face before her
father's, "If you are contented with Fred?"

Caleb screwed up his mouth and turned his head aside wisely.

"Now, father, you did praise him last Wednesday.  You said he had an
uncommon notion of stock, and a good eye for things."

"Did I?" said Caleb, rather slyly.

"Yes, I put it all down, and the date, anno Domini, and everything,"
said Mary.  "You like things to be neatly booked.  And then his
behavior to you, father, is really good; he has a deep respect for you;
and it is impossible to have a better temper than Fred has."

"Ay, ay; you want to coax me into thinking him a fine match."

"No, indeed, father.  I don't love him because he is a fine match."

"What for, then?"

"Oh, dear, because I have always loved him.  I should never like
scolding any one else so well; and that is a point to be thought of in
a husband."

"Your mind is quite settled, then, Mary?" said Caleb, returning to his
first tone.  "There's no other wish come into it since things have been
going on as they have been of late?"  (Caleb meant a great deal in that
vague phrase;) "because, better late than never.  A woman must not
force her heart--she'll do a man no good by that."

"My feelings have not changed, father," said Mary, calmly.  "I shall be
constant to Fred as long as he is constant to me.  I don't think either
of us could spare the other, or like any one else better, however much
we might admire them.  It would make too great a difference to us--like
seeing all the old places altered, and changing the name for
everything.  We must wait for each other a long while; but Fred knows
that."

Instead of speaking immediately, Caleb stood still and screwed his
stick on the grassy walk.  Then he said, with emotion in his voice,
"Well, I've got a bit of news.  What do you think of Fred going to live
at Stone Court, and managing the land there?"

"How can that ever be, father?" said Mary, wonderingly.

"He would manage it for his aunt Bulstrode.  The poor woman has been to
me begging and praying.  She wants to do the lad good, and it might be
a fine thing for him.  With saving, he might gradually buy the stock,
and he has a turn for farming."

"Oh, Fred would be so happy!  It is too good to believe."

"Ah, but mind you," said Caleb, turning his head warningly, "I must
take it on _my_ shoulders, and be responsible, and see after
everything; and that will grieve your mother a bit, though she mayn't
say so.  Fred had need be careful."

"Perhaps it is too much, father," said Mary, checked in her joy.
"There would be no happiness in bringing you any fresh trouble."

"Nay, nay; work is my delight, child, when it doesn't vex your mother.
And then, if you and Fred get married," here Caleb's voice shook just
perceptibly, "he'll be steady and saving; and you've got your mother's
cleverness, and mine too, in a woman's sort of way; and you'll keep him
in order.  He'll be coming by-and-by, so I wanted to tell you first,
because I think you'd like to tell _him_ by yourselves.  After that, I
could talk it well over with him, and we could go into business and the
nature of things."

"Oh, you dear good father!" cried Mary, putting her hands round her
father's neck, while he bent his head placidly, willing to be caressed.
"I wonder if any other girl thinks her father the best man in the
world!"

"Nonsense, child; you'll think your husband better."

"Impossible," said Mary, relapsing into her usual tone; "husbands are
an inferior class of men, who require keeping in order."

When they were entering the house with Letty, who had run to join them,
Mary saw Fred at the orchard-gate, and went to meet him.

"What fine clothes you wear, you extravagant youth!" said Mary, as Fred
stood still and raised his hat to her with playful formality.  "You are
not learning economy."

"Now that is too bad, Mary," said Fred.  "Just look at the edges of
these coat-cuffs! It is only by dint of good brushing that I look
respectable.  I am saving up three suits--one for a wedding-suit."

"How very droll you will look!--like a gentleman in an old
fashion-book."

"Oh no, they will keep two years."

"Two years! be reasonable, Fred," said Mary, turning to walk.  "Don't
encourage flattering expectations."

"Why not?  One lives on them better than on unflattering ones.  If we
can't be married in two years, the truth will be quite bad enough when
it comes."

"I have heard a story of a young gentleman who once encouraged
flattering expectations, and they did him harm."

"Mary, if you've got something discouraging to tell me, I shall bolt; I
shall go into the house to Mr. Garth.  I am out of spirits.  My father
is so cut up--home is not like itself.  I can't bear any more bad news."

"Should you call it bad news to be told that you were to live at Stone
Court, and manage the farm, and be remarkably prudent, and save money
every year till all the stock and furniture were your own, and you were
a distinguished agricultural character, as Mr. Borthrop Trumbull
says--rather stout, I fear, and with the Greek and Latin sadly
weather-worn?"

"You don't mean anything except nonsense, Mary?" said Fred, coloring
slightly nevertheless.

"That is what my father has just told me of as what may happen, and he
never talks nonsense," said Mary, looking up at Fred now, while he
grasped her hand as they walked, till it rather hurt her; but she would
not complain.

"Oh, I could be a tremendously good fellow then, Mary, and we could be
married directly."

"Not so fast, sir; how do you know that I would not rather defer our
marriage for some years?  That would leave you time to misbehave, and
then if I liked some one else better, I should have an excuse for
jilting you."

"Pray don't joke, Mary," said Fred, with strong feeling.  "Tell me
seriously that all this is true, and that you are happy because of
it--because you love me best."

"It is all true, Fred, and I am happy because of it--because I love you
best," said Mary, in a tone of obedient recitation.

They lingered on the door-step under the steep-roofed porch, and Fred
almost in a whisper said--

"When we were first engaged, with the umbrella-ring, Mary, you used
to--"

The spirit of joy began to laugh more decidedly in Mary's eyes, but the
fatal Ben came running to the door with Brownie yapping behind him,
and, bouncing against them, said--

"Fred and Mary! are you ever coming in?--or may I eat your cake?"


FINALE.


Every limit is a beginning as well as an ending.  Who can quit young
lives after being long in company with them, and not desire to know
what befell them in their after-years? For the fragment of a life,
however typical, is not the sample of an even web: promises may not be
kept, and an ardent outset may be followed by declension; latent powers
may find their long-waited opportunity; a past error may urge a grand
retrieval.

Marriage, which has been the bourne of so many narratives, is still a
great beginning, as it was to Adam and Eve, who kept their honeymoon in
Eden, but had their first little one among the thorns and thistles of
the wilderness.  It is still the beginning of the home epic--the
gradual conquest or irremediable loss of that complete union which
makes the advancing years a climax, and age the harvest of sweet
memories in common.

Some set out, like Crusaders of old, with a glorious equipment of hope
and enthusiasm and get broken by the way, wanting patience with each
other and the world.

All who have cared for Fred Vincy and Mary Garth will like to know that
these two made no such failure, but achieved a solid mutual happiness.
Fred surprised his neighbors in various ways.  He became rather
distinguished in his side of the county as a theoretic and practical
farmer, and produced a work on the "Cultivation of Green Crops and the
Economy of Cattle-Feeding" which won him high congratulations at
agricultural meetings.  In Middlemarch admiration was more reserved:
most persons there were inclined to believe that the merit of Fred's
authorship was due to his wife, since they had never expected Fred
Vincy to write on turnips and mangel-wurzel.

But when Mary wrote a little book for her boys, called "Stories of
Great Men, taken from Plutarch," and had it printed and published by
Gripp & Co., Middlemarch, every one in the town was willing to give the
credit of this work to Fred, observing that he had been to the
University, "where the ancients were studied," and might have been a
clergyman if he had chosen.

In this way it was made clear that Middlemarch had never been deceived,
and that there was no need to praise anybody for writing a book, since
it was always done by somebody else.

Moreover, Fred remained unswervingly steady.  Some years after his
marriage he told Mary that his happiness was half owing to Farebrother,
who gave him a strong pull-up at the right moment.  I cannot say that
he was never again misled by his hopefulness: the yield of crops or the
profits of a cattle sale usually fell below his estimate; and he was
always prone to believe that he could make money by the purchase of a
horse which turned out badly--though this, Mary observed, was of
course the fault of the horse, not of Fred's judgment.  He kept his
love of horsemanship, but he rarely allowed himself a day's hunting;
and when he did so, it was remarkable that he submitted to be laughed
at for cowardliness at the fences, seeming to see Mary and the boys
sitting on the five-barred gate, or showing their curly heads between
hedge and ditch.

There were three boys: Mary was not discontented that she brought forth
men-children only; and when Fred wished to have a girl like her, she
said, laughingly, "that would be too great a trial to your mother."
Mrs. Vincy in her declining years, and in the diminished lustre of her
housekeeping, was much comforted by her perception that two at least of
Fred's boys were real Vincys, and did not "feature the Garths." But
Mary secretly rejoiced that the youngest of the three was very much
what her father must have been when he wore a round jacket, and showed
a marvellous nicety of aim in playing at marbles, or in throwing stones
to bring down the mellow pears.

Ben and Letty Garth, who were uncle and aunt before they were well in
their teens, disputed much as to whether nephews or nieces were more
desirable; Ben contending that it was clear girls were good for less
than boys, else they would not be always in petticoats, which showed
how little they were meant for; whereupon Letty, who argued much from
books, got angry in replying that God made coats of skins for both Adam
and Eve alike--also it occurred to her that in the East the men too
wore petticoats.  But this latter argument, obscuring the majesty of
the former, was one too many, for Ben answered contemptuously, "The
more spooneys they!" and immediately appealed to his mother whether
boys were not better than girls.  Mrs. Garth pronounced that both were
alike naughty, but that boys were undoubtedly stronger, could run
faster, and throw with more precision to a greater distance.  With this
oracular sentence Ben was well satisfied, not minding the naughtiness;
but Letty took it ill, her feeling of superiority being stronger than
her muscles.

Fred never became rich--his hopefulness had not led him to expect that;
but he gradually saved enough to become owner of the stock and
furniture at Stone Court, and the work which Mr. Garth put into his
hands carried him in plenty through those "bad times" which are always
present with farmers.  Mary, in her matronly days, became as solid in
figure as her mother; but, unlike her, gave the boys little formal
teaching, so that Mrs. Garth was alarmed lest they should never be well
grounded in grammar and geography.  Nevertheless, they were found quite
forward enough when they went to school; perhaps, because they had
liked nothing so well as being with their mother.  When Fred was riding
home on winter evenings he had a pleasant vision beforehand of the
bright hearth in the wainscoted parlor, and was sorry for other men who
could not have Mary for their wife; especially for Mr. Farebrother.
"He was ten times worthier of you than I was," Fred could now say to
her, magnanimously.  "To be sure he was," Mary answered; "and for that
reason he could do better without me.  But you--I shudder to think what
you would have been--a curate in debt for horse-hire and cambric
pocket-handkerchiefs!"

On inquiry it might possibly be found that Fred and Mary still inhabit
Stone Court--that the creeping plants still cast the foam of their
blossoms over the fine stone-wall into the field where the walnut-trees
stand in stately row--and that on sunny days the two lovers who were
first engaged with the umbrella-ring may be seen in white-haired
placidity at the open window from which Mary Garth, in the days of old
Peter Featherstone, had often been ordered to look out for Mr. Lydgate.

Lydgate's hair never became white.  He died when he was only fifty,
leaving his wife and children provided for by a heavy insurance on his
life.  He had gained an excellent practice, alternating, according to
the season, between London and a Continental bathing-place; having
written a treatise on Gout, a disease which has a good deal of wealth
on its side.  His skill was relied on by many paying patients, but he
always regarded himself as a failure: he had not done what he once
meant to do.  His acquaintances thought him enviable to have so
charming a wife, and nothing happened to shake their opinion.  Rosamond
never committed a second compromising indiscretion.  She simply
continued to be mild in her temper, inflexible in her judgment,
disposed to admonish her husband, and able to frustrate him by
stratagem.  As the years went on he opposed her less and less, whence
Rosamond concluded that he had learned the value of her opinion; on the
other hand, she had a more thorough conviction of his talents now that
he gained a good income, and instead of the threatened cage in Bride
Street provided one all flowers and gilding, fit for the bird of
paradise that she resembled.  In brief, Lydgate was what is called a
successful man.  But he died prematurely of diphtheria, and Rosamond
afterwards married an elderly and wealthy physician, who took kindly to
her four children.  She made a very pretty show with her daughters,
driving out in her carriage, and often spoke of her happiness as "a
reward"--she did not say for what, but probably she meant that it was a
reward for her patience with Tertius, whose temper never became
faultless, and to the last occasionally let slip a bitter speech which
was more memorable than the signs he made of his repentance.  He once
called her his basil plant; and when she asked for an explanation, said
that basil was a plant which had flourished wonderfully on a murdered
man's brains.  Rosamond had a placid but strong answer to such
speeches.  Why then had he chosen her?  It was a pity he had not had
Mrs. Ladislaw, whom he was always praising and placing above her.  And
thus the conversation ended with the advantage on Rosamond's side.  But
it would be unjust not to tell, that she never uttered a word in
depreciation of Dorothea, keeping in religious remembrance the
generosity which had come to her aid in the sharpest crisis of her life.

Dorothea herself had no dreams of being praised above other women,
feeling that there was always something better which she might have
done, if she had only been better and known better.  Still, she never
repented that she had given up position and fortune to marry Will
Ladislaw, and he would have held it the greatest shame as well as
sorrow to him if she had repented.  They were bound to each other by a
love stronger than any impulses which could have marred it.  No life
would have been possible to Dorothea which was not filled with emotion,
and she had now a life filled also with a beneficent activity which she
had not the doubtful pains of discovering and marking out for herself.
Will became an ardent public man, working well in those times when
reforms were begun with a young hopefulness of immediate good which has
been much checked in our days, and getting at last returned to
Parliament by a constituency who paid his expenses.  Dorothea could
have liked nothing better, since wrongs existed, than that her husband
should be in the thick of a struggle against them, and that she should
give him wifely help.  Many who knew her, thought it a pity that so
substantive and rare a creature should have been absorbed into the life
of another, and be only known in a certain circle as a wife and mother.
But no one stated exactly what else that was in her power she ought
rather to have done--not even Sir James Chettam, who went no further
than the negative prescription that she ought not to have married Will
Ladislaw.

But this opinion of his did not cause a lasting alienation; and the way
in which the family was made whole again was characteristic of all
concerned.  Mr. Brooke could not resist the pleasure of corresponding
with Will and Dorothea; and one morning when his pen had been
remarkably fluent on the prospects of Municipal Reform, it ran off into
an invitation to the Grange, which, once written, could not be done
away with at less cost than the sacrifice (hardly to be conceived) of
the whole valuable letter.  During the months of this correspondence
Mr. Brooke had continually, in his talk with Sir James Chettam, been
presupposing or hinting that the intention of cutting off the entail
was still maintained; and the day on which his pen gave the daring
invitation, he went to Freshitt expressly to intimate that he had a
stronger sense than ever of the reasons for taking that energetic step
as a precaution against any mixture of low blood in the heir of the
Brookes.

But that morning something exciting had happened at the Hall.  A letter
had come to Celia which made her cry silently as she read it; and when
Sir James, unused to see her in tears, asked anxiously what was the
matter, she burst out in a wail such as he had never heard from her
before.

"Dorothea has a little boy.  And you will not let me go and see her.
And I am sure she wants to see me.  And she will not know what to do
with the baby--she will do wrong things with it.  And they thought she
would die.  It is very dreadful!  Suppose it had been me and little
Arthur, and Dodo had been hindered from coming to see me!  I wish you
would be less unkind, James!"

"Good heavens, Celia!" said Sir James, much wrought upon, "what do you
wish?  I will do anything you like.  I will take you to town to-morrow
if you wish it."  And Celia did wish it.

It was after this that Mr. Brooke came, and meeting the Baronet in the
grounds, began to chat with him in ignorance of the news, which Sir
James for some reason did not care to tell him immediately.  But when
the entail was touched on in the usual way, he said, "My dear sir, it
is not for me to dictate to you, but for my part I would let that
alone.  I would let things remain as they are."

Mr. Brooke felt so much surprised that he did not at once find out how
much he was relieved by the sense that he was not expected to do
anything in particular.

Such being the bent of Celia's heart, it was inevitable that Sir James
should consent to a reconciliation with Dorothea and her husband.
Where women love each other, men learn to smother their mutual dislike.
Sir James never liked Ladislaw, and Will always preferred to have Sir
James's company mixed with another kind: they were on a footing of
reciprocal tolerance which was made quite easy only when Dorothea and
Celia were present.

It became an understood thing that Mr. and Mrs. Ladislaw should pay at
least two visits during the year to the Grange, and there came
gradually a small row of cousins at Freshitt who enjoyed playing with
the two cousins visiting Tipton as much as if the blood of these
cousins had been less dubiously mixed.

Mr. Brooke lived to a good old age, and his estate was inherited by
Dorothea's son, who might have represented Middlemarch, but declined,
thinking that his opinions had less chance of being stifled if he
remained out of doors.

Sir James never ceased to regard Dorothea's second marriage as a
mistake; and indeed this remained the tradition concerning it in
Middlemarch, where she was spoken of to a younger generation as a fine
girl who married a sickly clergyman, old enough to be her father, and
in little more than a year after his death gave up her estate to marry
his cousin--young enough to have been his son, with no property, and
not well-born. Those who had not seen anything of Dorothea usually
observed that she could not have been "a nice woman," else she would
not have married either the one or the other.

Certainly those determining acts of her life were not ideally
beautiful.  They were the mixed result of young and noble impulse
struggling amidst the conditions of an imperfect social state, in which
great feelings will often take the aspect of error, and great faith the
aspect of illusion.  For there is no creature whose inward being is so
strong that it is not greatly determined by what lies outside it.  A
new Theresa will hardly have the opportunity of reforming a conventual
life, any more than a new Antigone will spend her heroic piety in
daring all for the sake of a brother's burial: the medium in which
their ardent deeds took shape is forever gone.  But we insignificant
people with our daily words and acts are preparing the lives of many
Dorotheas, some of which may present a far sadder sacrifice than that
of the Dorothea whose story we know.

Her finely touched spirit had still its fine issues, though they were
not widely visible.  Her full nature, like that river of which Cyrus
broke the strength, spent itself in channels which had no great name on
the earth.  But the effect of her being on those around her was
incalculably diffusive: for the growing good of the world is partly
dependent on unhistoric acts; and that things are not so ill with you
and me as they might have been, is half owing to the number who lived
faithfully a hidden life, and rest in unvisited tombs.



More than three centuries and a half ago, in the mid spring-time of
1492, we are sure that the angel of the dawn, as he travelled with broad
slow wing from the Levant to the Pillars of Hercules, and from the
summits of the Caucasus across all the snowy Alpine ridges to the dark
nakedness of the Western isles, saw nearly the same outline of firm land
and unstable sea--saw the same great mountain shadows on the same
valleys as he has seen to-day--saw olive mounts, and pine forests, and
the broad plains green with young corn or rain-freshened grass--saw the
domes and spires of cities rising by the river-sides or mingled with the
sedge-like masts on the many-curved sea-coast, in the same spots where
they rise to-day.  And as the faint light of his course pierced into the
dwellings of men, it fell, as now, on the rosy warmth of nestling
children; on the haggard waking of sorrow and sickness; on the hasty
uprising of the hard-handed labourer; and on the late sleep of the
night-student, who had been questioning the stars or the sages, or his
own soul, for that hidden knowledge which would break through the
barrier of man's brief life, and show its dark path, that seemed to bend
no whither, to be an arc in an immeasurable circle of light and glory.
The great river-courses which have shaped the lives of men have hardly
changed; and those other streams, the life-currents that ebb and flow in
human hearts, pulsate to the same great needs, the same great loves and
terrors.  As our thought follows close in the slow wake of the dawn, we
are impressed with the broad sameness of the human lot, which never
alters in the main headings of its history--hunger and labour, seed-time
and harvest, love and death.

Even if, instead of following the dim daybreak, our imagination pauses
on a certain historical spot and awaits the fuller morning, we may see a
world-famous city, which has hardly changed its outline since the days
of Columbus, seeming to stand as an almost unviolated symbol, amidst the
flux of human things, to remind us that we still resemble the men of the
past more than we differ from them, as the great mechanical principles
on which those domes and towers were raised must make a likeness in
human building that will be broader and deeper than all possible change.
And doubtless, if the spirit of a Florentine citizen, whose eyes were
closed for the last time while Columbus was still waiting and arguing
for the three poor vessels with which he was to set sail from the port
of Palos, could return from the shades and pause where our thought is
pausing, he would believe that there must still be fellowship and
understanding for him among the inheritors of his birthplace.

Let us suppose that such a Shade has been permitted to revisit the
glimpses of the golden morning, and is standing once more on the famous
hill of San Miniato, which overlooks Florence from the south.

The Spirit is clothed in his habit as he lived: the folds of his
well-lined black silk garment or _lucco_ hang in grave unbroken lines
from neck to ankle; his plain cloth cap, with its _becchetto_, or long
hanging strip of drapery, to serve as a scarf in case of need, surmounts
a penetrating face, not, perhaps, very handsome, but with a firm,
well-cut mouth, kept distinctly human by a close-shaven lip and chin.
It is a face charged with memories of a keen and various life passed
below there on the banks of the gleaming river; and as he looks at the
scene before him, the sense of familiarity is so much stronger than the
perception of change, that he thinks it might be possible to descend
once more amongst the streets, and take up that busy life where he left
it.  For it is not only the mountains and the westward-bending river
that he recognises; not only the dark sides of Mount Morello opposite to
him, and the long valley of the Arno that seems to stretch its grey
low-tufted luxuriance to the far-off ridges of Carrara; and the steep
height of Fiesole, with its crown of monastic walls and cypresses; and
all the green and grey slopes sprinkled with villas which he can name as
he looks at them.  He sees other familiar objects much closer to his
daily walks.  For though he misses the seventy or more towers that once
surmounted the walls, and encircled the city as with a regal diadem, his
eyes will not dwell on that blank; they are drawn irresistibly to the
unique tower springing, like a tall flower-stem drawn towards the sun,
from the square turreted mass of the Old Palace in the very heart of the
city--the tower that looks none the worse for the four centuries that
have passed since he used to walk under it.  The great dome, too,
greatest in the world, which, in his early boyhood, had been only a
daring thought in the mind of a small, quick-eyed man--there it raises
its large curves still, eclipsing the hills.  And the well-known
bell-towers--Giotto's, with its distant hint of rich colour, and the
graceful-spired Badia, and the rest--he looked at them all from the
shoulder of his nurse.

"Surely," he thinks, "Florence can still ring her bells with the solemn
hammer-sound that used to beat on the hearts of her citizens and strike
out the fire there.  And here, on the right, stands the long dark mass
of Santa Croce, where we buried our famous dead, laying the laurel on
their cold brows and fanning them with the breath of praise and of
banners.  But Santa Croce had no spire then: we Florentines were too
full of great building projects to carry them all out in stone and
marble; we had our frescoes and our shrines to pay for, not to speak of
rapacious condottieri, bribed royalty, and purchased territories, and
our facades and spires must needs wait.  But what architect can the
Frati Minori [the Franciscans] have employed to build that spire for
them?  If it had been built in my day, Filippo Brunelleschi or
Michelozzo would have devised something of another fashion than that--
something worthy to crown the church of Arnolfo."

At this the Spirit, with a sigh, lets his eyes travel on to the city
walls, and now he dwells on the change there with wonder at these modern
times.  Why have five out of the eleven convenient gates been closed?
And why, above all, should the towers have been levelled that were once
a glory and defence?  Is the world become so peaceful, then, and do
Florentines dwell in such harmony, that there are no longer conspiracies
to bring ambitious exiles home again with armed bands at their back?
These are difficult questions: it is easier and pleasanter to recognise
the old than to account for the new.  And there flows Arno, with its
bridges just where they used to be--the Ponte Vecchio, least like other
bridges in the world, laden with the same quaint shops where our Spirit
remembers lingering a little on his way perhaps to look at the progress
of that great palace which Messer Luca Pitti had set a-building with
huge stones got from the Hill of Bogoli [now Boboli] close behind, or
perhaps to transact a little business with the cloth-dressers in
Oltrarno.  The exorbitant line of the Pitti roof is hidden from San
Miniato; but the yearning of the old Florentine is not to see Messer
Luca's too ambitious palace which he built unto himself; it is to be
down among those narrow streets and busy humming Piazze where he
inherited the eager life of his fathers.  Is not the anxious voting with
black and white beans still going on down there?  Who are the Priori in
these months, eating soberly--regulated official dinners in the Palazzo
Vecchio, with removes of tripe and boiled partridges, seasoned by
practical jokes against the ill-fated butt among those potent signors?
Are not the significant banners still hung from the windows--still
distributed with decent pomp under Orcagna's Loggia every two months?

Life had its zest for the old Florentine when he, too, trod the marble
steps and shared in those dignities.  His politics had an area as wide
as his trade, which stretched from Syria to Britain, but they had also
the passionate intensity, and the detailed practical interest, which
could belong only to a narrow scene of corporate action; only to the
members of a community shut in close by the hills and by walls of six
miles' circuit, where men knew each other as they passed in the street,
set their eyes every day on the memorials of their commonwealth, and
were conscious of having not simply the right to vote, but the chance of
being voted for.  He loved his honours and his gains, the business of
his counting-house, of his guild, of the public council-chamber; he
loved his enmities too, and fingered the white bean which was to keep a
hated name out of the _borsa_ with more complacency than if it had been
a golden florin.  He loved to strengthen his family by a good alliance,
and went home with a triumphant light in his eyes after concluding a
satisfactory marriage for his son or daughter under his favourite loggia
in the evening cool; he loved his game at chess under that same loggia,
and his biting jest, and even his coarse joke, as not beneath the
dignity of a man eligible for the highest magistracy.  He had gained an
insight into all sorts of affairs at home and abroad: he had been of the
"Ten" who managed the war department, of the "Eight" who attended to
home discipline, of the Priori or Signori who were the heads of the
executive government; he had even risen to the supreme office of
Gonfaloniere; he had made one in embassies to the Pope and to the
Venetians; and he had been commissary to the hired army of the Republic,
directing the inglorious bloodless battles in which no man died of brave
breast wounds--_virtuosi colpi_--but only of casual falls and
tramplings.  And in this way he had learned to distrust men without
bitterness; looking on life mainly as a game of skill, but not dead to
traditions of heroism and clean-handed honour.  For the human soul is
hospitable, and will entertain conflicting sentiments and contradictory
opinions with much impartiality.  It was his pride besides, that he was
duly tinctured with the learning of his age, and judged not altogether
with the vulgar, but in harmony with the ancients: he, too, in his
prime, had been eager for the most correct manuscripts, and had paid
many florins for antique vases and for disinterred busts of the ancient
immortals--some, perhaps, _truncis naribus_, wanting as to the nose, but
not the less authentic; and in his old age he had made haste to look at
the first sheets of that fine Homer which was among the early glories of
the Florentine press.  But he had not, for all that, neglected to hang
up a waxen image or double of himself under the protection of the
Madonna Annunziata, or to do penance for his sins in large gifts to the
shrines of saints whose lives had not been modelled on the study of the
classics; he had not even neglected making liberal bequests towards
buildings for the Frati, against whom he had levelled many a jest.

For the Unseen Powers were mighty.  Who knew--who was sure--that there
was _any_ name given to them behind which there was no angry force to be
appeased, no intercessory pity to be won?  Were not gems medicinal,
though they only pressed the finger?  Were not all things charged with
occult virtues?  Lucretius might be right--he was an ancient, and a
great poet; Luigi Pulci, too, who was suspected of not believing
anything from the roof upward (_dal tetto in su_), had very much the air
of being right over the supper-table, when the wine and jests were
circulating fast, though he was only a poet in the vulgar tongue.  There
were even learned personages who maintained that Aristotle, wisest of
men (unless, indeed, Plato were wiser?) was a thoroughly irreligious
philosopher; and a liberal scholar must entertain all speculations.  But
the negatives might, after all, prove false; nay, seemed manifestly
false, as the circling hours swept past him, and turned round with
graver faces.  For had not the world become Christian?  Had he not been
baptised in San Giovanni, where the dome is awful with symbols of
coming judgment, and where the altar bears a crucified Image disturbing
to perfect complacency in one's self and the world?  Our resuscitated
Spirit was not a pagan philosopher, nor a philosophising pagan poet, but
a man of the fifteenth century, inheriting its strange web of belief and
unbelief; of Epicurean levity and fetichistic dread; of pedantic
impossible ethics uttered by rote, and crude passions acted out with
childish impulsiveness; of inclination towards a self-indulgent
paganism, and inevitable subjection to that human conscience which, in
the unrest of a new growth, was rilling the air with strange prophecies
and presentiments.

He had smiled, perhaps, and shaken his head dubiously, as he heard
simple folk talk of a Pope Angelico, who was to come by-and-by and bring
in a new order of things, to purify the Church from simony, and the
lives of the clergy from scandal--a state of affairs too different from
what existed under Innocent the Eighth for a shrewd merchant and
politician to regard the prospect as worthy of entering into his
calculations.  But he felt the evils of the time, nevertheless; for he
was a man of public spirit, and public spirit can never be wholly
immoral, since its essence is care for a common good.  That very
Quaresima or Lent of 1492 in which he died, still in his erect old age,
he had listened in San Lorenzo, not without a mixture of satisfaction,
to the preaching of a Dominican Friar, named Girolamo Savonarola, who
denounced with a rare boldness the worldliness and vicious habits of the
clergy, and insisted on the duty of Christian men not to live for their
own ease when wrong was triumphing in high places, and not to spend
their wealth in outward pomp even in the churches, when their
fellow-citizens were suffering from want and sickness.  The Frate
carried his doctrine rather too far for elderly ears; yet it was a
memorable thing to see a preacher move his audience to such a pitch that
the women even took off their ornaments, and delivered them up to be
sold for the benefit of the needy.

"He was a noteworthy man, that Prior of San Marco," thinks our Spirit;
"somewhat arrogant and extreme, perhaps, especially in his denunciations
of speedy vengeance.  Ah, _Iddio non paga il Sabatol_ [`God does not pay
on a Saturday']--the wages of men's sins often linger in their payment,
and I myself saw much established wickedness of long-standing
prosperity.  But a Frate Predicatore who wanted to move the people--how
could he be moderate?  He might have been a little less defiant and
curt, though, to Lorenzo de' Medici, whose family had been the very
makers of San Marco: was that quarrel ever made up?  And our Lorenzo
himself, with the dim outward eyes and the subtle inward vision, did he
get over that illness at Careggi?  It was but a sad, uneasy-looking face
that he would carry out of the world which had given him so much, and
there were strong suspicions that his handsome son would play the part
of Rehoboam.  How has it all turned out?  Which party is likely to be
banished and have its houses sacked just now?  Is there any successor of
the incomparable Lorenzo, to whom the great Turk is so gracious as to
send over presents of rare animals, rare relics, rare manuscripts, or
fugitive enemies, suited to the tastes of a Christian Magnifico who is
at once lettered and devout--and also slightly vindictive?  And what
famous scholar is dictating the Latin letters of the Republic--what
fiery philosopher is lecturing on Dante in the Duomo, and going home to
write bitter invectives against the father and mother of the bad critic
who may have found fault with his classical spelling?  Are our wiser
heads leaning towards alliance with the Pope and the Regno [The name
given to Naples by way of distinction among the Italian States], or are
they rather inclining their ears to the orators of France and of Milan?

"There is knowledge of these things to be had in the streets below, on
the beloved _marmi_ in front of the churches, and under the sheltering
Loggie, where surely our citizens have still their gossip and debates,
their bitter and merry jests as of old.  For are not the well-remembered
buildings all there?  The changes have not been so great in those
uncounted years.  I will go down and hear--I will tread the familiar
pavement, and hear once again the speech of Florentines."

Go not down, good Spirit! for the changes are great and the speech of
Florentines would sound as a riddle in your ears.  Or, if you go, mingle
with no politicians on the _marmi_, or elsewhere; ask no questions about
trade in the Calimara; confuse yourself with no inquiries into
scholarship, official or monastic.  Only look at the sunlight and
shadows on the grand walls that were built solidly, and have endured in
their grandeur; look at the faces of the little children, making another
sunlight amid the shadows of age; look, if you will, into the churches,
and hear the same chants, see the same images as of old--the images of
willing anguish for a great end, of beneficent love and ascending glory;
see upturned living faces, and lips moving to the old prayers for help.
These things have not changed.  The sunlight and shadows bring their old
beauty and waken the old heart-strains at morning, noon, and eventide;
the little children are still the symbol of the eternal marriage between
love and duty; and men still yearn for the reign of peace and
righteousness--still own _that_ life to be the highest which is a
conscious voluntary sacrifice.  For the Pope Angelico is not come yet.



CHAPTER ONE.

THE SHIPWRECKED STRANGER.

The Loggia de' Cerchi stood in the heart of old Florence, within a
labyrinth of narrow streets behind the Badia, now rarely threaded by the
stranger, unless in a dubious search for a certain severely simple
doorplace, bearing this inscription:

  Qui Nacque Il Divino Poeta.

To the ear of Dante, the same streets rang with the shout and clash of
fierce battle between rival families; but in the fifteenth century, they
were only noisy with the unhistorical quarrels and broad jests of
woolcarders in the cloth-producing quarters of San Martino and Garbo.

Under this loggia, in the early morning of the 9th of April 1492, two
men had their eyes fixed on each other: one was stooping slightly, and
looking downward with the scrutiny of curiosity; the other, lying on the
pavement, was looking upward with the startled gaze of a
suddenly-awakened dreamer.

The standing figure was the first to speak.  He was a grey-haired,
broad-shouldered man, of the type which, in Tuscan phrase, is moulded
with the fist and polished with the pickaxe; but the self-important
gravity which had written itself out in the deep lines about his brow
and mouth seemed intended to correct any contemptuous inferences from
the hasty workmanship which Nature had bestowed on his exterior.  He had
deposited a large well-filled bag, made of skins, on the pavement, and
before him hung a pedlar's basket, garnished partly with small
woman's-ware, such as thread and pins, and partly with fragments of
glass, which had probably been taken in exchange for those commodities.

"Young man," he said, pointing to a ring on the finger of the reclining
figure, "when your chin has got a stiffer crop on it, you'll know better
than to take your nap in street-corners with a ring like that on your
forefinger.  By the holy 'vangels! if it had been anybody but me
standing over you two minutes ago--but Bratti Ferravecchi is not the man
to steal.  The cat couldn't eat her mouse if she didn't catch it alive,
and Bratti couldn't relish gain if it had no taste of a bargain.  Why,
young man, one San Giovanni, three years ago, the Saint sent a dead body
in my way--a blind beggar, with his cap well-lined with pieces--but, if
you'll believe me, my stomach turned against the money I'd never
bargained for, till it came into my head that San Giovanni owed me the
pieces for what I spend yearly at the Festa; besides, I buried the body
and paid for a mass--and so I saw it was a fair bargain.  But how comes
a young man like you, with the face of Messer San Michele, to be
sleeping on a stone bed with the wind for a curtain?"

The deep guttural sounds of the speaker were scarcely intelligible to
the newly-waked, bewildered listener, but he understood the action of
pointing to his ring: he looked down at it, and, with a half-automatic
obedience to the warning, took it off and thrust it within his doublet,
rising at the same time and stretching himself.

"Your tunic and hose match ill with that jewel, young man," said Bratti,
deliberately.  "Anybody might say the saints had sent _you_ a dead body;
but if you took the jewels, I hope you buried him--and you can afford a
mass or two for him into the bargain."

Something like a painful thrill appeared to dart through the frame of
the listener, and arrest the careless stretching of his arms and chest.
For an instant he turned on Bratti with a sharp frown; but he
immediately recovered an air of indifference, took off the red Levantine
cap which hung like a great purse over his left ear, pushed back his
long dark-brown curls, and glancing at his dress, said, smilingly--

"You speak truth, friend: my garments are as weather-stained as an old
sail, and they are not old either, only, like an old sail, they have had
a sprinkling of the sea as well as the rain.  The fact is, I'm a
stranger in Florence, and when I came in footsore last night I preferred
flinging myself in a corner of this hospitable porch to hunting any
longer for a chance hostelry, which might turn out to be a nest of
blood-suckers of more sorts than one."

"A stranger, in good sooth," said Bratti, "for the words come all
melting out of your throat, so that a Christian and a Florentine can't
tell a hook from a hanger.  But you're not from Genoa?  More likely from
Venice, by the cut of your clothes?"

"At this present moment," said the stranger, smiling, "it is of less
importance where I come from than where I can go to for a mouthful of
breakfast.  This city of yours turns a grim look on me just here: can
you show me the way to a more lively quarter, where I can get a meal and
a lodging?"

"That I can," said Bratti, "and it is your good fortune, young man, that
I have happened to be walking in from Rovezzano this morning, and turned
out of my way to Mercato Vecchio to say an Ave at the Badia.  That, I
say, is your good fortune.  But it remains to be seen what is my profit
in the matter.  Nothing for nothing, young man.  If I show you the way
to Mercato Vecchio, you'll swear by your patron saint to let me have the
bidding for that stained suit of yours, when you set up a better--as
doubtless you will."

"Agreed, by San Niccolo," said the other, laughing.  "But now let us set
off to this said Mercato, for I feel the want of a better lining to this
doublet of mine which you are coveting."

"Coveting?  Nay," said Bratti, heaving his bag on his back and setting
out.  But he broke off in his reply, and burst out in loud, harsh tones,
not unlike the creaking and grating of a cart-wheel: "_Chi
abbaratta_--_baratta_--_b'ratta_--_chi abbaratta cenci e
vetri_--_b'ratta ferri vecchi_?"  ["Who wants to exchange rags, broken
glass, or old iron?"]

"It's worth but little," he said presently, relapsing into his
conversational tone.  "Hose and altogether, your clothes are worth but
little.  Still, if you've a mind to set yourself up with a lute worth
more than any new one, or with a sword that's been worn by a Ridolfi, or
with a paternoster of the best mode, I could let you have a great
bargain, by making an allowance for the clothes; for, simple as I stand
here, I've got the best-furnished shop in the Ferravecchi, and it's
close by the Mercato.  The Virgin be praised! it's not a pumpkin I carry
on my shoulders.  But I don't stay caged in my shop all day: I've got a
wife and a raven to stay at home and mind the stock.  _Chi
abbaratta_--_baratta_--_b'ratta_? ...  And now, young man, where do you
come from, and what's your business in Florence?"

"I thought you liked nothing that came to you without a bargain," said
the stranger.  "You've offered me nothing yet in exchange for that
information."

"Well, well; a Florentine doesn't mind bidding a fair price for news: it
stays the stomach a little though he may win no hose by it.  If I take
you to the prettiest damsel in the Mercato to get a cup of milk--that
will be a fair bargain."

"Nay; I can find her myself, if she be really in the Mercato; for pretty
heads are apt to look forth of doors and windows.  No, no.  Besides, a
sharp trader, like you, ought to know that he who bids for nuts and
news, may chance to find them hollow."

"Ah! young man," said Bratti, with a sideway glance of some admiration,
"you were not born of a Sunday--the salt-shops were open when you came
into the world.  You're not a Hebrew, eh?--come from Spain or Naples,
eh?  Let me tell you the Frati Minori are trying to make Florence as hot
as Spain for those dogs of hell that want to get all the profit of usury
to themselves and leave none for Christians; and when you walk the
Calimara with a piece of yellow cloth in your cap, it will spoil your
beauty more than a sword-cut across that smooth olive cheek of
yours.--_Abbaratta, baratta_--_chi abbaratta_?--I tell you, young man,
grey cloth is against yellow cloth; and there's as much grey cloth in
Florence as would make a gown and cowl for the Duomo, and there's not so
much yellow cloth as would make hose for Saint Christopher--blessed be
his name, and send me a sight of him this day!--_Abbaratta, baratta,
b'ratta_--_chi abbaratta_?"

"All that is very amusing information you are parting with for nothing,"
said the stranger, rather scornfully; "but it happens not to concern me.
I am no Hebrew."

"See, now!" said Bratti, triumphantly; "I've made a good bargain with
mere words.  I've made you tell me something, young man, though you're
as hard to hold as a lamprey.  San Giovanni be praised! a blind
Florentine is a match for two one-eyed men.  But here we are in the
Mercato."

They had now emerged from the narrow streets into a broad piazza, known
to the elder Florentine writers as the Mercato Vecchio, or the Old
Market.  This piazza, though it had been the scene of a provision-market
from time immemorial, and may, perhaps, says fond imagination, be the
very spot to which the Fesulean ancestors of the Florentines descended
from their high fastness to traffic with the rustic population of the
valley, had not been shunned as a place of residence by Florentine
wealth.  In the early decades of the fifteenth century, which was now
near its end, the Medici and other powerful families of the _popolani
grassi_, or commercial nobility, had their houses there, not perhaps
finding their ears much offended by the loud roar of mingled dialects,
or their eyes much shocked by the butchers' stalls, which the old poet
Antonio Pucci accounts a chief glory, or _dignita_, of a market that, in
his esteem, eclipsed the markets of all the earth beside.  But the glory
of mutton and veal (well attested to be the flesh of the right animals;
for were not the skins, with the heads attached, duly displayed,
according to the decree of the Signoria?) was just now wanting to the
Mercato, the time of Lent not being yet over.  The proud corporation, or
"Art," of butchers was in abeyance, and it was the great harvest-time of
the market-gardeners, the cheesemongers, the vendors of macaroni, corn,
eggs, milk, and dried fruits: a change which was apt to make the women's
voices predominant in the chorus.  But in all seasons there was the
experimental ringing of pots and pans, the chinking of the
money-changers, the tempting offers of cheapness at the old-clothes
stalls, the challenges of the dicers, the vaunting of new linens and
woollens, of excellent wooden-ware, kettles, and frying-pans; there was
the choking of the narrow inlets with mules and carts, together with
much uncomplimentary remonstrance in terms remarkably identical with the
insults in use by the gentler sex of the present day, under the same
imbrowning and heating circumstances.  Ladies and gentlemen, who came to
market, looked on at a larger amount of amateur fighting than could
easily be seen in these later times, and beheld more revolting rags,
beggary, and rascaldom, than modern householders could well picture to
themselves.  As the day wore on, the hideous drama of the gaming-house
might be seen here by any chance open-air spectator--the quivering
eagerness, the blank despair, the sobs, the blasphemy, and the blows:--

  "E vedesi chi perde con gran soffi,
  E bestemmiar colla mano alia mascella,
  E ricever e dar di molti ingoffi."

But still there was the relief of prettier sights: there were
brood-rabbits, not less innocent and astonished than those of our own
period; there were doves and singing-birds to be bought as presents for
the children; there were even kittens for sale, and here and there a
handsome _gattuccio_, or "Tom," with the highest character for mousing;
and, better than all, there were young, softly-rounded cheeks and bright
eyes, freshened by the start from the far-off castello [walled village]
at daybreak, not to speak of older faces with the unfading charm of
honest goodwill in them, such as are never quite wanting in scenes of
human industry.  And high on a pillar in the centre of the place--a
venerable pillar, fetched from the church of San Giovanni--stood
Donatello's stone statue of Plenty, with a fountain near it, where, says
old Pucci, the good wives of the market freshened their utensils, and
their throats also; not because they were unable to buy wine, but
because they wished to save the money for their husbands.

But on this particular morning a sudden change seemed to have come over
the face of the market.  The _deschi_, or stalls, were indeed partly
dressed with their various commodities, and already there were
purchasers assembled, on the alert to secure the finest, freshest
vegetables and the most unexceptionable butter.  But when Bratti and his
companion entered the piazza, it appeared that some common preoccupation
had for the moment distracted the attention both of buyers and sellers
from their proper business.  Most of the traders had turned their backs
on their goods, and had joined the knots of talkers who were
concentrating themselves at different points in the piazza.  A vendor of
old-clothes, in the act of hanging out a pair of long hose, had
distractedly hung them round his neck in his eagerness to join the
nearest group; an oratorical cheesemonger, with a piece of cheese in one
hand and a knife in the other, was incautiously making notes of his
emphatic pauses on that excellent specimen of _marzolino_; and elderly
market-women, with their egg-baskets in a dangerously oblique position,
contributed a wailing fugue of invocation.

In this general distraction, the Florentine boys, who were never wanting
in any street scene, and were of an especially mischievous sort--as who
should say, very sour crabs indeed--saw a great opportunity.  Some made
a rush at the nuts and dried figs, others preferred the farinaceous
delicacies at the cooked provision stalls--delicacies to which certain
four-footed dogs also, who had learned to take kindly to Lenten fare,
applied a discriminating nostril, and then disappeared with much
rapidity under the nearest shelter; while the mules, not without some
kicking and plunging among impeding baskets, were stretching their
muzzles towards the aromatic green-meat.

"Diavolo!" said Bratti, as he and his companion came, quite unnoticed,
upon the noisy scene; "the Mercato is gone as mad as if the most Holy
Father had excommunicated us again.  I must know what this is.  But
never fear: it seems a thousand years to you till you see the pretty
Tessa, and get your cup of milk; but keep hold of me, and I'll hold to
my bargain.  Remember, I'm to have the first bid for your suit,
specially for the hose, which, with all their stains, are the best
_panno di garbo_--as good as ruined, though, with mud and weather
stains."

"Ola, Monna Trecca," Bratti proceeded, turning towards an old woman on
the outside of the nearest group, who for the moment had suspended her
wail to listen, and shouting close in her ear: "Here are the mules
upsetting all your bunches of parsley: is the world coming to an end,
then?"

"Monna Trecca" (equivalent to "Dame Greengrocer") turned round at this
unexpected trumpeting in her right ear, with a half-fierce,
half-bewildered look, first at the speaker, then at her disarranged
commodities, and then at the speaker again.

"A bad Easter and a bad year to you, and may you die by the sword!" she
burst out, rushing towards her stall, but directing this first volley of
her wrath against Bratti, who, without heeding the malediction, quietly
slipped into her place, within hearing of the narrative which had been
absorbing her attention; making a sign at the same time to the younger
stranger to keep near him.

"I tell you I saw it myself," said a fat man, with a bunch of
newly-purchased leeks in his hand.  "I was in Santa Maria Novella, and
saw it myself.  The woman started up and threw out her arms, and cried
out and said she saw a big bull with fiery horns coming down on the
church to crush it.  I saw it myself."

"Saw what, Goro?" said a man of slim figure, whose eye twinkled rather
roguishly.  He wore a close jerkin, a skull-cap lodged carelessly over
his left ear as if it had fallen there by chance, a delicate linen apron
tucked up on one side, and a razor stuck in his belt.  "Saw the bull, or
only the woman?"

"Why, the woman, to be sure; but it's all one, _mi pare_: it doesn't
alter the meaning--_va_!" answered the fat man, with some contempt.

"Meaning? no, no; that's clear enough," said several voices at once, and
then followed a confusion of tongues, in which "Lights shooting over San
Lorenzo for three nights together"--"Thunder in the clear
starlight"--"Lantern of the Duomo struck with the sword of Saint
Michael"--"_Palle_" [Arms of the Medici]--"All smashed"--"Lions tearing
each other to pieces"--"Ah! and they might well"--"_Boto [Note 1] caduto
in Santissima Nunziata_!"--"Died like the best of Christians"--"God will
have pardoned him"--were often-repeated phrases, which shot across each
other like storm-driven hailstones, each speaker feeling rather the
necessity of utterance than of finding a listener.  Perhaps the only
silent members of the group were Bratti, who, as a new-comer, was busy
in mentally piecing together the flying fragments of information; the
man of the razor; and a thin-lipped, eager-looking personage in
spectacles, wearing a pen-and-ink case at his belt.

"_Ebbene_, Nello," said Bratti, skirting the group till he was within
hearing of the barber.  "It appears the Magnifico is dead--rest his
soul!--and the price of wax will rise?"

"Even as you say," answered Nello; and then added, with an air of extra
gravity, but with marvellous rapidity, "and his waxen image in the
Nunziata fell at the same moment, they say; or at some other time,
whenever it pleases the Frati Serviti, who know best.  And several cows
and women have had still-born calves this Quaresima; and for the bad
eggs that have been broken since the Carnival, nobody has counted them.
Ah! a great man--a great politician--a greater poet than Dante.  And yet
the cupola didn't fall, only the lantern.  _Che miracolo_!"

A sharp and lengthened "Pst!" was suddenly heard darting across the
pelting storm of gutturals.  It came from the pale man in spectacles,
and had the effect he intended; for the noise ceased, and all eyes in
the group were fixed on him with a look of expectation.

"'Tis well said you Florentines are blind," he began, in an incisive
high voice.  "It appears to me, you need nothing but a diet of hay to
make cattle of you.  What! do you think the death of Lorenzo is the
scourge God has prepared for Florence?  Go! you are sparrows chattering
praise over the dead hawk.  What! a man who was trying to slip a noose
over every neck in the Republic that he might tighten it at his
pleasure!  You like that; you like to have the election of your
magistrates turned into closet-work, and no man to use the rights of a
citizen unless he is a Medicean.  That is what is meant by qualification
now: _netto di specchio_ [Note 2] no longer means that a man pays his
dues to the Republic: it means that he'll wink at robbery of the
people's money--at robbery of their daughters' dowries; that he'll play
the chamberer and the philosopher by turns--listen to bawdy songs at the
Carnival and cry `Bellissimi!'--and listen to sacred lauds and cry again
`Bellissimi!'  But this is what you love: you grumble and raise a riot
over your _quattrini bianchi_" (white farthings); "but you take no
notice when the public treasury has got a hole in the bottom for the
gold to run into Lorenzo's drains.  You like to pay for footmen to walk
before and behind one of your citizens, that he may be affable and
condescending to you.  `See, what a tall Pisan we keep,' say you, `to
march before him with the drawn sword flashing in our eyes!--and yet
Lorenzo smiles at us.  What goodness!'  And you think the death of a
man, who would soon have saddled and bridled you as the Sforza has
saddled and bridled Milan--you think his death is the scourge God is
warning you of by portents.  I tell you there is another sort of scourge
in the air."

"Nay, nay, Ser Cioni, keep astride your politics, and never mount your
prophecy; politics is the better horse," said Nello.  "But if you talk
of portents, what portent can be greater than a pious notary?  Balaam's
ass was nothing to it."

"Ay, but a notary out of work, with his inkbottle dry," said another
bystander, very much out at elbows.  "Better don a cowl at once, Ser
Cioni: everybody will believe in your fasting."

The notary turned and left the group with a look of indignant contempt,
disclosing, as he did so, the sallow but mild face of a short man who
had been standing behind him, and whose bent shoulders told of some
sedentary occupation.

"By San Giovanni, though," said the fat purchaser of leeks, with the air
of a person rather shaken in his theories, "I am not sure there isn't
some truth in what Ser Cioni says.  For I know I have good reason to
find fault with the _quattrini bianchi_ myself.  Grumble, did he say?
Suffocation!  I should think we do grumble; and, let anybody say the
word, I'll turn out into the piazza with the readiest, sooner than have
our money altered in our hands as if the magistracy were so many
necromancers.  And it's true Lorenzo might have hindered such work if he
would--and for the bull with the flaming horns, why, as Ser Cioni says,
there may be many meanings to it, for the matter of that; it may have
more to do with the taxes than we think.  For when God above sends a
sign, it's not to be supposed he'd have only one meaning."

"Spoken like an oracle, Goro!" said the barber.  "Why, when we poor
mortals can pack two or three meanings into one sentence, it were mere
blasphemy not to believe that your miraculous bull means everything that
any man in Florence likes it to mean."

"Thou art pleased to scoff, Nello," said the sallow, round-shouldered
man, no longer eclipsed by the notary, "but it is not the less true that
every revelation, whether by visions, dreams, portents, or the written
word, has many meanings, which it is given to the illuminated only to
unfold."

"Assuredly," answered Nello.  "Haven't I been to hear the Frate in San
Lorenzo?  But then, I've been to hear Fra Menico in the Duomo too; and
according to him, your Fra Girolamo, with his visions and
interpretations, is running after the wind of Mongibello, and those who
follow him are like to have the fate of certain swine that ran headlong
into the sea--or some hotter place.  With San Domenico roaring _e vero_
in one ear, and San Francisco screaming _e falso_ in the other, what is
a poor barber to do--unless he were illuminated?  But it's plain our
Goro here is beginning to be illuminated for he already sees that the
bull with the flaming horns means first himself, and secondly all the
other aggrieved taxpayers of Florence, who are determined to gore the
magistracy on the first opportunity."

"Goro is a fool!" said a bass voice, with a note that dropped like the
sound of a great bell in the midst of much tinkling.  "Let him carry
home his leeks and shake his flanks over his wool-beating.  He'll mend
matters more that way than by showing his tun-shaped body in the piazza,
as if everybody might measure his grievances by the size of his paunch.
The burdens that harm him most are his heavy carcass and his idleness."

The speaker had joined the group only in time to hear the conclusion of
Nello's speech, but he was one of those figures for whom all the world
instinctively makes way, as it would for a battering-ram.  He was not
much above the middle height, but the impression of enormous force which
was conveyed by his capacious chest and brawny arms bared to the
shoulder, was deepened by the keen sense and quiet resolution expressed
in his glance and in every furrow of his cheek and brow.  He had often
been an unconscious model to Domenico Ghirlandajo, when that great
painter was making the walls of the churches reflect the life of
Florence, and translating pale aerial traditions into the deep colour
and strong lines of the faces he knew.  The naturally dark tint of his
skin was additionally bronzed by the same powdery deposit that gave a
polished black surface to his leathern apron: a deposit which habit had
probably made a necessary condition of perfect ease, for it was not
washed off with punctilious regularity.

Goro turned his fat cheek and glassy eye on the frank speaker with a
look of deprecation rather than of resentment.

"Why, Niccolo," he said, in an injured tone, "I've heard you sing to
another tune than that, often enough, when you've been laying down the
law at San Gallo on a festa.  I've heard you say yourself, that a man
wasn't a mill-wheel, to be on the grind, grind, as long as he was
driven, and then stick in his place without stirring when the water was
low.  And you're as fond of your vote as any man in Florence--ay, and
I've heard you say, if Lorenzo--"

"Yes, yes," said Niccolo.  "Don't you be bringing up my speeches again
after you've swallowed them, and handing them about as if they were none
the worse.  I vote and I speak when there's any use in it: if there's
hot metal on the anvil, I lose no time before I strike; but I don't
spend good hours in tinkling on cold iron, or in standing on the
pavement as thou dost, Goro, with snout upward, like a pig under an
oak-tree.  And as for Lorenzo--dead and gone before his time--he was a
man who had an eye for curious iron-work; and if anybody says he wanted
to make himself a tyrant, I say, `_Sia_; I'll not deny which way the
wind blows when every man can see the weathercock.'  But that only means
that Lorenzo was a crested hawk, and there are plenty of hawks without
crests whose claws and beaks are as good for tearing.  Though if there
was any chance of a real reform, so that Marzocco [the stone Lion,
emblem of the Republic] might shake his mane and roar again, instead of
dipping his head to lick the feet of anybody that will mount and ride
him, I'd strike a good blow for it."

"And that reform is not far off, Niccolo," said the sallow, mild-faced
man, seizing his opportunity like a missionary among the too
light-minded heathens; "for a time of tribulation is coming, and the
scourge is at hand.  And when the Church is purged of cardinals and
prelates who traffic in her inheritance that their hands may be full to
pay the price of blood and to satisfy their own lusts, the State will be
purged too--and Florence will be purged of men who love to see avarice
and lechery under the red hat and the mitre because it gives them the
screen of a more hellish vice than their own."

"Ay, as Goro's broad body would be a screen for my narrow person in case
of missiles," said Nello; "but if that excellent screen happened to
fall, I were stifled under it, surely enough.  That is no bad image of
thine, Nanni--or, rather, of the Frate's; for I fancy there is no room
in the small cup of thy understanding for any other liquor than what he
pours into it."

"And it were well for thee, Nello," replied Nanni, "if thou couldst
empty thyself of thy scoffs and thy jests, and take in that liquor too.
The warning is ringing in the ears of all men: and it's no new story;
for the Abbot Joachim prophesied of the coming time three hundred years
ago, and now Fra Girolamo has got the message afresh.  He has seen it in
a vision, even as the prophets of old: he has seen the sword hanging
from the sky."

"Ay, and thou wilt see it thyself, Nanni, if thou wilt stare upward long
enough," said Niccolo; "for that pitiable tailor's work of thine makes
thy noddle so overhang thy legs, that thy eyeballs can see nought above
the stitching-board but the roof of thy own skull."

The honest tailor bore the jest without bitterness, bent on convincing
his hearers of his doctrine rather than of his dignity.  But Niccolo
gave him no opportunity for replying; for he turned away to the pursuit
of his market business, probably considering further dialogue as a
tinkling on cold iron.

"_Ebbene_" said the man with the hose round his neck, who had lately
migrated from another knot of talkers, "they are safest who cross
themselves and jest at nobody.  Do you know that the Magnifico sent for
the Frate at the last, and couldn't die without his blessing?"

"Was it so--in truth?" said several voices.  "Yes, yes--God will have
pardoned him."

"He died like the best of Christians."

"Never took his eyes from the holy crucifix."

"And the Frate will have given him his blessing?"

"Well, I know no more," said he of the hosen, "only Guccio there met a
footman going back to Careggi, and he told him the Frate had been sent
for yesternight, after the Magnifico had confessed and had the holy
sacraments."

"It's likely enough the Frate will tell the people something about it in
his sermon this morning; is it not true, Nanni?" said Goro.  "What do
you think?"

But Nanni had already turned his back on Goro, and the group was rapidly
thinning; some being stirred by the impulse to go and hear "new things"
from the Frate ("new things" were the nectar of Florentines); others by
the sense that it was time to attend to their private business.  In this
general movement, Bratti got close to the barber, and said--

"Nello, you've a ready tongue of your own, and are used to worming
secrets out of people when you've once got them well lathered.  I picked
up a stranger this morning as I was coming in from Rovezzano, and I can
spell him out no better than I can the letters on that scarf I bought
from the French cavalier.  It isn't my wits are at fault,--I want no man
to help me tell peas from paternosters,--but when you come to foreign
fashions, a fool may happen to know more than a wise man."

"Ay, thou hast the wisdom of Midas, who could turn rags and rusty nails
into gold, even as thou dost," said Nello, "and he had also something of
the ass about him.  But where is thy bird of strange plumage?"

Bratti was looking round, with an air of disappointment.

"Diavolo!" he said, with some vexation.  "The bird's flown.  It's true
he was hungry, and I forgot him.  But we shall find him in the Mercato,
within scent of bread and savours, I'll answer for him."

"Let us make the round of the Mercato, then," said Nello.

"It isn't his feathers that puzzle me," continued Bratti, as they pushed
their way together.  "There isn't much in the way of cut and cloth on
this side the Holy Sepulchre that can puzzle a Florentine."

"Or frighten him either," said Nello, "after he has seen an Englander or
a German."

"No, no," said Bratti, cordially; "one may never lose sight of the
Cupola and yet know the world, I hope.  Besides, this stranger's clothes
are good Italian merchandise, and the hose he wears were dyed in
Ognissanti before ever they were dyed with salt water, as he says.  But
the riddle about him is--"

Here Bratti's explanation was interrupted by some jostling as they
reached one of the entrances of the piazza, and before he could resume
it they had caught sight of the enigmatical object they were in search
of.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Note 1.  A votive image of Lorenzo, in wax, hung up in the Church of the
Annunziata, supposed to have fallen at the time of his death.  _Boto_ is
popular Tuscan for _Voto_.

Note 2.  The phrase used to express the absence of disqualification--
i.e., the not being entered as a debtor in the public book--_specchio_.



CHAPTER TWO.

BREAKFAST FOR LOVE.

After Bratti had joined the knot of talkers, the young stranger,
hopeless of learning what was the cause of the general agitation, and
not much caring to know what was probably of little interest to any but
born Florentines, soon became tired of waiting for Bratti's escort; and
chose to stroll round the piazza, looking out for some vendor of
eatables who might happen to have less than the average curiosity about
public news.  But as if at the suggestion of a sudden thought, he thrust
his hand into a purse or wallet that hung at his waist, and explored it
again and again with a look of frustration.

"Not an obolus, by Jupiter!" he murmured, in a language which was not
Tuscan or even Italian.  "I thought I had one poor piece left.  I must
get my breakfast for love, then!"

He had not gone many steps farther before it seemed likely that he had
found a quarter of the market where that medium of exchange might not be
rejected.

In a corner, away from any group of talkers, two mules were standing,
well adorned with red tassels and collars.  One of them carried wooden
milk-vessels, the other a pair of panniers filled with herbs and salads.
Resting her elbow on the neck of the mule that carried the milk, there
leaned a young girl, apparently not more than sixteen, with a red hood
surrounding her face, which was all the more baby-like in its prettiness
from the entire concealment of her hair.  The poor child, perhaps, was
weary after her labour in the morning twilight in preparation for her
walk to market from some castello three or four miles off, for she
seemed to have gone to sleep in that half-standing, half-leaning
posture.  Nevertheless, our stranger had no compunction in awaking her;
but the means he chose were so gentle, that it seemed to the damsel in
her dream as if a little sprig of thyme had touched her lips while she
was stooping to gather the herbs.  The dream was broken, however, for
she opened her blue baby-eyes, and started up with astonishment and
confusion to see the young stranger standing close before her.  She
heard him speaking to her in a voice which seemed so strange and soft,
that even if she had been more collected she would have taken it for
granted that he said something hopelessly unintelligible to her, and her
first movement was to turn her head a little away, and lift up a corner
of her green serge mantle as a screen.  He repeated his words--

"Forgive me, pretty one, for awaking you.  I'm dying with hunger, and
the scent of milk makes breakfast seem more desirable than ever."

He had chosen the words "_muoio di fame_" because he knew they would be
familiar to her ears; and he had uttered them playfully, with the
intonation of a mendicant.  This time he was understood; the corner of
the mantle was dropped, and in a few moments a large cup of fragrant
milk was held out to him.  He paid no further compliments before raising
it to his lips, and while he was drinking, the little maiden found
courage to look up at the long dark curls of this singular-voiced
stranger, who had asked for food in the tones of a beggar, but who,
though his clothes were much damaged, was unlike any beggar she had ever
seen.

While this process of survey was going on, there was another current of
feeling that carried her hand into a bag which hung by the side of the
mule, and when the stranger set down his cup, he saw a large piece of
bread held out towards him, and caught a glance of the blue eyes that
seemed intended as an encouragement to him to take this additional gift.

"But perhaps that is your own breakfast," he said.  "No, I have had
enough without payment.  A thousand thanks, my gentle one."

There was no rejoinder in words; but the piece of bread was pushed a
little nearer to him, as if in impatience at his refusal; and as the
long dark eyes of the stranger rested on the baby-face, it seemed to be
gathering more and more courage to look up and meet them.

"Ah, then, if I must take the bread," he said, laying his hand on it, "I
shall get bolder still, and beg for another kiss to make the bread
sweeter."

His speech was getting wonderfully intelligible in spite of the strange
voice, which had at first almost seemed a thing to make her cross
herself.  She blushed deeply, and lifted up a corner of her mantle to
her mouth again.  But just as the too presumptuous stranger was leaning
forward, and had his fingers on the arm that held up the screening
mantle, he was startled by a harsh voice close upon his ear.

"Who are _you_--with a murrain to you?  No honest buyer, I'll warrant,
but a hanger-on of the dicers--or something worse.  Go! dance off, and
find fitter company, or I'll give you a tune to a little quicker time
than you'll like."

The young stranger drew back and looked at the speaker with a glance
provokingly free from alarm and deprecation, and his slight expression
of saucy amusement broke into a broad beaming smile as he surveyed the
figure of his threatenor.  She was a stout but brawny woman, with a
man's jerkin slipped over her green serge gamurra or gown, and the
peaked hood of some departed mantle fastened round her sunburnt face,
which, under all its coarseness and premature wrinkles, showed a
half-sad, half-ludicrous maternal resemblance to the tender baby-face of
the little maiden--the sort of resemblance which often seems a more
croaking, shudder-creating prophecy than that of the death's-head.

There was something irresistibly propitiating in that bright young
smile, but Monna Ghita was not a woman to betray any weakness, and she
went on speaking, apparently with heightened exasperation.

"Yes, yes, you can grin as well as other monkeys in cap and jerkin.
You're a minstrel or a mountebank, I'll be sworn; you look for all the
world as silly as a tumbler when he's been upside down and has got on
his heels again.  And what fool's tricks hast thou been after, Tessa?"
she added, turning to her daughter, whose frightened face was more
inviting to abuse.  "Giving away the milk and victuals, it seems; ay,
ay, thou'dst carry water in thy ears for any idle vagabond that didn't
like to stoop for it, thou silly staring rabbit!  Turn thy back, and
lift the herbs out of the panniers, else I'll make thee say a few Aves
without counting."

"Nay, Madonna," said the stranger, with a pleading smile, "don't be
angry with your pretty Tessa for taking pity on a hungry traveller, who
found himself unexpectedly without a quattrino.  Your handsome face
looks so well when it frowns, that I long to see it illuminated by a
smile."

"_Va via_!  I know what paste you are made of.  You may tickle me with
that straw a good long while before I shall laugh, I can tell you.  Get
along, with a bad Easter! else I'll make a beauty-spot or two on that
face of yours that shall spoil your kissing on this side Advent."

As Monna Ghita lifted her formidable talons by way of complying with the
first and last requisite of eloquence, Bratti, who had come up a minute
or two before, had been saying to his companion, "What think you of this
pretty parrot, Nello?  Doesn't his tongue smack of Venice?"

"Nay, Bratti," said the barber in an undertone, "thy wisdom has much of
the ass in it, as I told thee just now; especially about the ears.  This
stranger is a Greek, else I'm not the barber who has had the sole and
exclusive shaving of the excellent Demetrio, and drawn more than one
sorry tooth from his learned jaw.  And this youth might be taken to have
come straight from Olympus--at least when he has had a touch of my
razor."

"_Orsu_!  Monna Ghita!" continued Nello, not sorry to see some sport;
"what has happened to cause such a thunderstorm?  Has this young
stranger been misbehaving himself?"

"By San Giovanni!" said the cautious Bratti, who had not shaken off his
original suspicions concerning the shabbily-clad possessor of jewels,
"he did right to run away from _me_, if he meant to get into mischief.
I can swear that I found him under the Loggia de' Cerchi, with a ring on
his finger such as I've seen worn by Bernardo Rucellai himself.  Not
another rusty nail's worth do I know about him."

"The fact is," said Nello, eyeing the stranger good-humouredly, "this
_bello giovane_ has been a little too presumptuous in admiring the
charms of Monna Ghita, and has attempted to kiss her while her
daughter's back is turned; for I observe that the pretty Tessa is too
busy to look this way at present.  Was it not so, Messer?"  Nello
concluded, in a tone of courtesy.

"You have divined the offence like a soothsayer," said the stranger,
laughingly.  "Only that I had not the good fortune to find Monna Ghita
here at first.  I begged a cup of milk from her daughter, and had
accepted this gift of bread, for which I was making a humble offering of
gratitude, before I had the higher pleasure of being face to face with
these riper charms which I was perhaps too bold in admiring."

"_Va, va_! be off, every one of you, and stay in purgatory till I pay to
get you out, will you?" said Monna Ghita, fiercely, elbowing Nello, and
leading forward her mule so as to compel the stranger to jump aside.
"Tessa, thou simpleton, bring forward thy mule a bit: the cart will be
upon us."

As Tessa turned to take the mule's bridle, she cast one timid glance at
the stranger, who was now moving with Nello out of the way of an
approaching market-cart; and the glance was just long enough to seize
the beckoning movement of his hand, which indicated that he had been
watching for this opportunity of an adieu.

"_Ebbene_," said Bratti, raising his voice to speak across the cart; "I
leave you with Nello, young man, for there's no pushing my bag and
basket any farther, and I have business at home.  But you'll remember
our bargain, because if you found Tessa without me, it was not my fault.
Nello will show you my shop in the Ferravecchi, and I'll not turn my
back on you."

"A thousand thanks, friend!" said the stranger, laughing, and then
turned away with Nello up the narrow street which led most directly to
the Piazza del Duomo.



CHAPTER THREE.

THE BARBER'S SHOP.

"To tell you the truth," said the young stranger to Nello, as they got a
little clearer of the entangled vehicles and mules, "I am not sorry to
be handed over by that patron of mine to one who has a less barbarous
accent, and a less enigmatical business.  Is it a common thing among you
Florentines for an itinerant trafficker in broken glass and rags to talk
of a shop where he sells lutes and swords?"

"Common?  No: our Bratti is not a common man.  He has a theory, and
lives up to it, which is more than I can say for any philosopher I have
the honour of shaving," answered Nello, whose loquacity, like an
over-full bottle, could never pour forth a small dose.  "Bratti means to
extract the utmost possible amount of pleasure, that is to say, of hard
bargaining, out of this life; winding it up with a bargain for the
easiest possible passage through purgatory, by giving Holy Church his
winnings when the game is over.  He has had his will made to that effect
on the cheapest terms a notary could be got for.  But I have often said
to him, `Bratti, thy bargain is a limping one, and thou art on the lame
side of it.  Does it not make thee a little sad to look at the pictures
of the Paradiso?  Thou wilt never be able there to chaffer for rags and
rusty nails: the saints and angels want neither pins nor tinder; and
except with San Bartolommeo, who carries his skin about in an
inconvenient manner, I see no chance of thy making a bargain for
second-hand clothing.'  But God pardon me," added Nello, changing his
tone, and crossing himself, "this light talk ill beseems a morning when
Lorenzo lies dead, and the Muses are tearing their hair--always a
painful thought to a barber; and you yourself, Messere, are probably
under a cloud, for when a man of your speech and presence takes up with
so sorry a night's lodging, it argues some misfortune to have befallen
him."

"What Lorenzo is that whose death you speak of?" said the stranger,
appearing to have dwelt with too anxious an interest on this point to
have noticed the indirect inquiry that followed it.

"What Lorenzo?  There is but one Lorenzo, I imagine, whose death could
throw the Mercato into an uproar, set the lantern of the Duomo leaping
in desperation, and cause the lions of the Republic to feel under an
immediate necessity to devour one another.  I mean Lorenzo de' Medici,
the Pericles of our Athens--if I may make such a comparison in the ear
of a Greek."

"Why not?" said the other, laughingly; "for I doubt whether Athens, even
in the days of Pericles, could have produced so learned a barber."

"Yes, yes; I thought I could not be mistaken," said the rapid Nello,
"else I have shaved the venerable Demetrio Calcondila to little purpose;
but pardon me, I am lost in wonder: your Italian is better than his,
though he has been in Italy forty years--better even than that of the
accomplished Marullo, who may be said to have married the Italic Muse in
more senses than one, since he has married our learned and lovely
Alessandra Scala."

"It will lighten your wonder to know that I come of a Greek stock
planted in Italian soil much longer than the mulberry-trees which have
taken so kindly to it.  I was born at Bari, and my--I mean, I was
brought up by an Italian--and, in fact, I am a Greek, very much as your
peaches are Persian.  The Greek dye was subdued in me, I suppose, till I
had been dipped over again by long abode and much travel in the land of
gods and heroes.  And, to confess something of my private affairs to
you, this same Greek dye, with a few ancient gems I have about me, is
the only fortune shipwreck has left me.  But--when the towers fall, you
know it is an ill business for the small nest-builders--the death of
your Pericles makes me wish I had rather turned my steps towards Rome,
as I should have done but for a fallacious Minerva in the shape of an
Augustinian monk.  `At Rome,' he said, `you will be lost in a crowd of
hungry scholars; but at Florence, every corner is penetrated by the
sunshine of Lorenzo's patronage: Florence is the best market in Italy
for such commodities as yours.'"

"_Gnaffe_, and so it will remain, I hope," said Nello, "Lorenzo was not
the only patron and judge of learning in our city--heaven forbid!
Because he was a large melon, every other Florentine is not a pumpkin, I
suppose.  Have we not Bernardo Rucellai, and Alamanno Rinuccini, and
plenty more?  And if you want to be informed on such matters, I, Nello,
am your man.  It seems to me a thousand years till I can be of service
to a _bel erudito_ like yourself.  And, first of all, in the matter of
your hair.  That beard, my fine young man, must be parted with, were it
as dear to you as the nymph of your dreams.  Here at Florence, we love
not to see a man with his nose projecting over a cascade of hair.  But,
remember, you will have passed the Rubicon, when once you have been
shaven: if you repent, and let your beard grow after it has acquired
stoutness by a struggle with the razor, your mouth will by-and-by show
no longer what Messer Angelo calls the divine prerogative of lips, but
will appear like a dark cavern fringed with horrent brambles."

"That is a terrible prophecy," said the Greek, "especially if your
Florentine maidens are many of them as pretty as the little Tessa I
stole a kiss from this morning."

"Tessa? she is a rough-handed contadina: you will rise into the favour
of dames who bring no scent of the mule-stables with them.  But to that
end, you must not have the air of a _sgherro_, or a man of evil repute:
you must look like a courtier, and a scholar of the more polished sort,
such as our Pietro Crinito--like one who sins among well-bred, well-fed
people, and not one who sucks down vile _vino di sotto_ in a chance
tavern."

"With all my heart," said the stranger.  "If the Florentine Graces
demand it, I am willing to give up this small matter of my beard, but--"

"Yes, yes," interrupted Nello.  "I know what you would say.  It is the
_bella zazzera_--the hyacinthine locks, you do not choose to part with;
and there is no need.  Just a little pruning--ecco!--and you will look
not unlike the illustrious prince Pico di Mirandola in his prime.  And
here we are in good time in the Piazza San Giovanni, and at the door of
my shop.  But you are pausing, I see: naturally, you want to look at our
wonder of the world, our Duomo, our Santa Maria del Fiore.  Well, well,
a mere glance; but I beseech you to leave a closer survey till you have
been shaved: I am quivering with the inspiration of my art even to the
very edge of my razor.  Ah, then, come round this way."

The mercurial barber seized the arm of the stranger, and led him to a
point, on the south side of the piazza, from which he could see at once
the huge dark shell of the cupola, the slender soaring grace of Giotto's
campanile, and the quaint octagon of San Giovanni in front of them,
showing its unique gates of storied bronze, which still bore the
somewhat dimmed glory of their original gilding.  The inlaid marbles
were then fresher in their pink, and white, and purple, than they are
now, when the winters of four centuries have turned their white to the
rich ochre of well-mellowed meerschaum; the facade of the cathedral did
not stand ignominious in faded stucco, but had upon it the magnificent
promise of the half-completed marble inlaying and statued niches, which
Giotto had devised a hundred and fifty years before; and as the
campanile in all its harmonious variety of colour and form led the eyes
upward, high into the clear air of this April morning, it seemed a
prophetic symbol, telling that human life must somehow and some time
shape itself into accord with that pure aspiring beauty.

But this was not the impression it appeared to produce on the Greek.
His eyes were irresistibly led upward, but as he stood with his arms
folded and his curls falling backward, there was a slight touch of scorn
on his lip, and when his eyes fell again they glanced round with a
scanning coolness which was rather piquing to Nello's Florentine spirit.

"Well, my fine young man," he said, with some impatience, "you seem to
make as little of our Cathedral as if you were the Angel Gabriel come
straight from Paradise.  I should like to know if you have ever seen
finer work than our Giotto's tower, or any cupola that would not look a
mere mushroom by the side of Brunelleschi's there, or any marbles finer
or more cunningly wrought than these that our Signoria got from far-off
quarries, at a price that would buy a dukedom.  Come, now, have you ever
seen anything to equal them?"

"If you asked me that question with a scimitar at my throat, after the
Turkish fashion, or even your own razor," said the young Greek, smiling
gaily, and moving on towards the gates of the Baptistery, "I daresay you
might get a confession of the true faith from me.  But with my throat
free from peril, I venture to tell you that your buildings smack too
much of Christian barbarism for my taste.  I have a shuddering sense of
what there is inside--hideous smoked Madonnas; fleshless saints in
mosaic, staring down idiotic astonishment and rebuke from the apse;
skin-clad skeletons hanging on crosses, or stuck all over with arrows,
or stretched on gridirons; women and monks with heads aside in perpetual
lamentation.  I have seen enough of those wry-necked favourites of
heaven at Constantinople.  But what is this bronze door rough with
imagery?  These women's figures seem moulded in a different spirit from
those starved and staring saints I spoke of: these heads in high relief
speak of a human mind within them, instead of looking like an index to
perpetual spasms and colic."

"Yes, yes," said Nello, with some triumph.  "I think we shall show you
by-and-by that our Florentine art is not in a state of barbarism.  These
gates, my fine young man, were moulded half a century ago, by our
Lorenzo Ghiberti, when he counted hardly so many years as you do."

"Ah, I remember," said the stranger, turning away, like one whose
appetite for contemplation was soon satisfied.  "I have heard that your
Tuscan sculptors and painters have been studying the antique a little.
But with monks for models, and the legends of mad hermits and martyrs
for subjects, the vision of Olympus itself would be of small use to
them."

"I understand," said Nello, with a significant shrug, as they walked
along.  "You are of the same mind as Michele Marullo, ay, and as Angelo
Poliziano himself, in spite of his canonicate, when he relaxes himself a
little in my shop after his lectures, and talks of the gods awaking from
their long sleep and making the woods and streams vital once more.  But
he rails against the Roman scholars who want to make us all talk Latin
again: `My ears,' he says, `are sufficiently flayed by the barbarisms of
the learned, and if the vulgar are to talk Latin I would as soon have
been in Florence the day they took to beating all the kettles in the
city because the bells were not enough to stay the wrath of the saints.'
Ah, Messer Greco, if you want to know the flavour of our scholarship,
you must frequent my shop: it is the focus of Florentine intellect, and
in that sense the navel of the earth--as my great predecessor,
Burchiello, said of _his_ shop, on the more frivolous pretension that
his street of the Calimara was the centre of our city.  And here we are
at the sign of `Apollo and the Razor.'  Apollo, you see, is bestowing
the razor on the Triptolemus of our craft, the first reaper of beards,
the sublime _Anonimo_, whose mysterious identity is indicated by a
shadowy hand."

"I see thou hast had custom already, Sandro," continued Nello,
addressing a solemn-looking dark-eyed youth, who made way for them on
the threshold.  "And now make all clear for this signor to sit down.
And prepare the finest-scented lather, for he has a learned and a
handsome chin."

"You have a pleasant little adytum there, I see," said the stranger,
looking through a latticed screen which divided the shop from a room of
about equal size, opening into a still smaller walled enclosure, where a
few bays and laurels surrounded a stone Hermes.  "I suppose your
conclave of _eruditi_ meets there?"

"There, and not less in my shop," said Nello, leading the way into the
inner room, in which were some benches, a table, with one book in
manuscript and one printed in capitals lying open upon it, a lute, a few
oil-sketches, and a model or two of hands and ancient masks.  "For my
shop is a no less fitting haunt of the Muses, as you will acknowledge
when you feel the sudden illumination of understanding and the serene
vigour of inspiration that will come to you with a clear chin.  Ah! you
can make that lute discourse, I perceive.  I, too, have some skill that
way, though the serenata is useless when daylight discloses a visage
like mine, looking no fresher than an apple that has stood the winter.
But look at that sketch: it is a fancy of Piero di Cosimo's, a strange
freakish painter, who says he saw it by long looking at a mouldy wall."

The sketch Nello pointed to represented three masks--one a drunken
laughing Satyr, another a sorrowing Magdalen, and the third, which lay
between them, the rigid, cold face of a Stoic: the masks rested
obliquely on the lap of a little child, whose cherub features rose above
them with something of the supernal promise in the gaze which painters
had by that time learned to give to the Divine Infant.

"A symbolical picture, I see," said the young Greek, touching the lute
while he spoke, so as to bring out a slight musical murmur.  "The child,
perhaps, is the Golden Age, wanting neither worship nor philosophy.  And
the Golden Age can always come back as long as men are born in the form
of babies, and don't come into the world in cassock or furred mantle.
Or, the child may mean the wise philosophy of Epicurus, removed alike
from the gross, the sad, and the severe."

"Ah! everybody has his own interpretation for that picture," said Nello;
"and if you ask Piero himself what he meant by it, he says his pictures
are an appendix which Messer Domeneddio has been pleased to make to the
universe, and if any man is in doubt what they mean, he had better
inquire of Holy Church.  He has been asked to paint a picture after the
sketch, but he puts his fingers to his ears and shakes his head at that;
the fancy is past, he says--a strange animal, our Piero.  But now all is
ready for your initiation into the mysteries of the razor."

"Mysteries they may well be called," continued the barber, with rising
spirits at the prospect of a long monologue, as he imprisoned the young
Greek in the shroud-like shaving-cloth; "mysteries of Minerva and the
Graces.  I get the flower of men's thoughts, because I seize them in the
first moment after shaving.  (Ah! you wince a little at the lather: it
tickles the outlying limits of the nose, I admit.)  And that is what
makes the peculiar fitness of a barber's shop to become a resort of wit
and learning.  For, look now at a druggist's shop: there is a dull
conclave at the sign of `The Moor,' that pretends to rival mine; but
what sort of inspiration, I beseech you, can be got from the scent of
nauseous vegetable decoctions?--to say nothing of the fact that you no
sooner pass the threshold than you see a doctor of physic, like a
gigantic spider disguised in fur and scarlet, waiting for his prey; or
even see him blocking up the doorway seated on a bony hack, inspecting
saliva.  (Your chin a little elevated, if it please you: contemplate
that angel who is blowing the trumpet at you from the ceiling.  I had it
painted expressly for the regulation of my clients' chins.)  Besides,
your druggist, who herborises and decocts, is a man of prejudices: he
has poisoned people according to a system, and is obliged to stand up
for his system to justify the consequences.  Now a barber can be
dispassionate; the only thing he necessarily stands by is the razor,
always providing he is not an author.  That was the flaw in my great
predecessor Burchiello: he was a poet, and had consequently a prejudice
about his own poetry.  I have escaped that; I saw very early that
authorship is a narrowing business, in conflict with the liberal art of
the razor, which demands an impartial affection for all men's chins.
Ecco, Messer! the outline of your chin and lip is as clear as a
maiden's; and now fix your mind on a knotty question--ask yourself
whether you are bound to spell Virgil with an _i_ or an _e_, and say if
you do not feel an unwonted clearness on the point.  Only, if you decide
for the _i_, keep it to yourself till your fortune is made, for the _e_
hath the stronger following in Florence.  Ah!  I think I see a gleam of
still quicker wit in your eye.  I have it on the authority of our young
Niccolo Macchiavelli, himself keen enough to discern _il pelo nell'
uovo_, as we say, and a great lover of delicate shaving, though his
beard is hardly of two years' date, that no sooner do the hairs begin to
push themselves, than he perceives a certain grossness of apprehension
creeping over him."

"Suppose you let me look at myself," said the stranger, laughing.  "The
happy effect on my intellect is perhaps obstructed by a little doubt as
to the effect on my appearance."

"Behold yourself in this mirror, then; it is a Venetian mirror from
Murano, the true _nosce teipsum_, as I have named it, compared with
which the finest mirror of steel or silver is mere darkness.  See now,
how by diligent shaving, the nether region of your face may preserve its
human outline, instead of presenting no distinction from the physiognomy
of a bearded owl or a Barbary ape.  I have seen men whose beards have so
invaded their cheeks, that one might have pitied them as the victims of
a sad, brutalising chastisement befitting our Dante's Inferno, if they
had not seemed to strut with a strange triumph in their extravagant
hairiness."

"It seems to me," said the Greek, still looking into the mirror, "that
you have taken away some of my capital with your razor--I mean a year or
two of age, which might have won me more ready credit for my learning.
Under the inspection of a patron whose vision has grown somewhat dim, I
shall have a perilous resemblance to a maiden of eighteen in the
disguise of hose and jerkin."

"Not at all," said Nello, proceeding to clip the too extravagant curls;
"your proportions are not those of a maiden.  And for your age, I myself
remember seeing Angelo Poliziano begin his lectures on the Latin
language when he had a younger beard than yours; and between ourselves,
his juvenile ugliness was not less signal than his precocious
scholarship.  Whereas you--no, no, your age is not against you; but
between ourselves, let me hint to you that your being a Greek, though it
be only an Apulian Greek, is not in your favour.  Certain of our
scholars hold that your Greek learning is but a wayside degenerate plant
until it has been transplanted into Italian brains, and that now there
is such a plentiful crop of the superior quality, your native teachers
are mere propagators of degeneracy.  Ecco! your curls are now of the
right proportion to neck and shoulders; rise, Messer, and I will free
you from the encumbrance of this cloth.  _Gnaffe_!  I almost advise you
to retain the faded jerkin and hose a little longer; they give you the
air of a fallen prince."

"But the question is," said the young Greek, leaning against the high
back of a chair, and returning Nello's contemplative admiration with a
look of inquiring anxiety; "the question is, in what quarter I am to
carry my princely air, so as to rise from the said fallen condition.  If
your Florentine patrons of learning share this scholarly hostility to
the Greeks, I see not how your city can be a hospitable refuge for me,
as you seemed to say just now."

"_Pian piano_--not so fast," said Nello, sticking his thumbs into his
belt and nodding to Sandro to restore order.  "I will not conceal from
you that there is a prejudice against Greeks among us; and though, as a
barber unsnared by authorship, I share no prejudices, I must admit that
the Greeks are not always such pretty youngsters as yourself: their
erudition is often of an uncombed, unmannerly aspect, and encrusted with
a barbarous utterance of Italian, that makes their converse hardly more
euphonious than that of a Tedesco in a state of vinous loquacity.  And
then, again, excuse me--we Florentines have liberal ideas about speech,
and consider that an instrument which can flatter and promise so
cleverly as the tongue, must have been partly made for those purposes;
and that truth is a riddle for eyes and wit to discover, which it were a
mere spoiling of sport for the tongue to betray.  Still we have our
limits beyond which we call dissimulation treachery.  But it is said of
the Greeks that their honesty begins at what is the hanging point with
us, and that since the old Furies went to sleep, your Christian Greek is
of so easy a conscience that he would make a stepping-stone of his
father's corpse."

The flush on the stranger's face indicated what seemed so natural a
movement of resentment, that the good-natured Nello hastened to atone
for his want of reticence.

"Be not offended, _bel giovane_; I am but repeating what I hear in my
shop; as you may perceive, my eloquence is simply the cream which I skim
off my clients' talk.  Heaven forbid I should fetter my impartiality by
entertaining an opinion.  And for that same scholarly objection to the
Greeks," added Nello, in a more mocking tone, and with a significant
grimace, "the fact is, you are heretics, Messer; jealousy has nothing to
do with it: if you would just change your opinion about leaven, and
alter your Doxology a little, our Italian scholars would think it a
thousand years till they could give up their chairs to you.  Yes, yes;
it is chiefly religious scruple, and partly also the authority of a
great classic,--Juvenal, is it not?  He, I gather, had his bile as much
stirred by the swarm of Greeks as our Messer Angelo, who is fond of
quoting some passage about their incorrigible impudence--_audacia
perdita_."

"Pooh! the passage is a compliment," said the Greek, who had recovered
himself, and seemed wise enough to take the matter gaily--

  "`Ingenium velox, audacia perdita, sermo
  Promptus, et Isaeo torrentior.'

"A rapid intellect and ready eloquence may carry off a little
impudence."

"Assuredly," said Nello.  "And since, as I see, you know Latin
literature as well as Greek, you will not fall into the mistake of
Giovanni Argiropulo, who ran full tilt against Cicero, and pronounced
him all but a pumpkin-head.  For, let me give you one bit of advice,
young man--trust a barber who has shaved the best chins, and kept his
eyes and ears open for twenty years--oil your tongue well when you talk
of the ancient Latin writers, and give it an extra dip when you talk of
the modern.  A wise Greek may win favour among us; witness our excellent
Demetrio, who is loved by many, and not hated immoderately even by the
most renowned scholars."

"I discern the wisdom of your advice so clearly," said the Greek, with
the bright smile which was continually lighting up the fine form and
colour of his young face, "that I will ask you for a little more.  Who
now, for example, would be the most likely patron for me?  Is there a
son of Lorenzo who inherits his tastes?  Or is there any other wealthy
Florentine specially addicted to purchasing antique gems?  I have a fine
Cleopatra cut in sardonyx, and one or two other intaglios and cameos,
both curious and beautiful, worthy of being added to the cabinet of a
prince.  Happily, I had taken the precaution of fastening them within
the lining of my doublet before I set out on my voyage.  Moreover, I
should like to raise a small sum for my present need on this ring of
mine," (here he took out the ring and replaced it on his finger), "if
you could recommend me to any honest trafficker."

"Let us see, let us see," said Nello, perusing the floor, and walking up
and down the length of his shop.  "This is no time to apply to Piero de'
Medici, though he has the will to make such purchases if he could always
spare the money; but I think it is another sort of Cleopatra that he
covets most...  Yes, yes, I have it.  What you want is a man of wealth,
and influence, and scholarly tastes--not one of your learned porcupines,
bristling all over with critical tests, but one whose Greek and Latin
are of a comfortable laxity.  And that man is Bartolommeo Scala, the
secretary of our Republic.  He came to Florence as a poor adventurer
himself--a miller's son--a `branny monster,' as he has been nicknamed by
our honey-lipped Poliziano, who agrees with him as well as my teeth
agree with lemon-juice.  And, by the by, that may be a reason why the
secretary may be the more ready to do a good turn to a strange scholar.
For, between you and me, _bel giovane_--trust a barber who has shaved
the best scholars--friendliness is much such a steed as Ser Benghi's: it
will hardly show much alacrity unless it has got the thistle of hatred
under its tail.  However, the secretary is a man who'll keep his word to
you, even to the halving of a fennel-seed; and he is not unlikely to buy
some of your gems."

"But how am I to get at this great man?" said the Greek, rather
impatiently.

"I was coming to that," said Nello.  "Just now everybody of any public
importance will be full of Lorenzo's death, and a stranger may find it
difficult to get any notice.  But in the meantime, I could take you to a
man who, if he has a mind, can help you to a chance of a favourable
interview with Scala sooner than anybody else in Florence--worth seeing
for his own sake too, to say nothing of his collections, or of his
daughter Romola, who is as fair as the Florentine lily before it got
quarrelsome and turned red."

"But if this father of the beautiful Romola makes collections, why
should he not like to buy some of my gems himself?"

Nello shrugged his shoulders.  "For two good reasons--want of sight to
look at the gems, and want of money to pay for them.  Our old Bardo de'
Bardi is so blind that he can see no more of his daughter than, as he
says, a glimmering of something bright when she comes very near him:
doubtless her golden hair, which, as Messer Luigi Pulci says of his
Meridiana's, `_raggia come stella per sereno_.'  Ah! here come some
clients of mine, and I shouldn't wonder if one of them could serve your
turn about that ring."



CHAPTER FOUR.

FIRST IMPRESSIONS.

"Good-day, Messer Domenico," said Nello to the foremost of the two
visitors who entered the shop, while he nodded silently to the other.
"You come as opportunely as cheese on macaroni.  Ah! you are in haste--
wish to be shaved without delay--ecco!  And this is a morning when every
one has grave matter on his mind.  Florence orphaned--the very pivot of
Italy snatched away--heaven itself at a loss what to do next.  _Oime_!
Well, well; the sun is nevertheless travelling on towards dinner-time
again; and, as I was saying, you come like cheese ready grated.  For
this young stranger was wishing for an honourable trader who would
advance, him a sum on a certain ring of value, and if I had counted
every goldsmith and money-lender in Florence on my fingers, I couldn't
have found a better name than Menico Cennini.  Besides, he hath other
ware in which you deal--Greek learning, and young eyes--a double
implement which you printers are always in need of."

The grave elderly man, son of that Bernardo Cennini, who, twenty years
before, having heard of the new process of printing carried on by
Germans, had cast his own types in Florence, remained necessarily in
lathered silence and passivity while Nello showered this talk in his
ears, but turned a slow sideway gaze on the stranger.

"This fine young man has unlimited Greek, Latin, or Italian at your
service," continued Nello, fond of interpreting by very ample
paraphrase.  "He is as great a wonder of juvenile learning as Francesco
Filelfo or our own incomparable Poliziano.  A second Guarino, too, for
he has had the misfortune to be shipwrecked, and has doubtless lost a
store of precious manuscripts that might have contributed some
correctness even to your correct editions, Domenico.  Fortunately, he
has rescued a few gems of rare value.  His name is--you said your name,
Messer, was--?"

"Tito Melema," said the stranger, slipping the ring from his finger, and
presenting it to Cennini, whom Nello, not less rapid with his razor than
with his tongue, had now released from the shaving-cloth.

Meanwhile the man who had entered the shop in company with the
goldsmith--a tall figure, about fifty, with a short trimmed beard,
wearing an old felt hat and a threadbare mantle--had kept his eye fixed
on the Greek, and now said abruptly--

"Young man, I am painting a picture of Sinon deceiving old Priam, and I
should be glad of your face for my Sinon, if you'd give me a sitting."

Tito Melema started and looked round with a pale astonishment in his
face as if at a sudden accusation; but Nello left him no time to feel at
a loss for an answer: "Piero," said the barber, "thou art the most
extraordinary compound of humours and fancies ever packed into a human
skin.  What trick wilt thou play with the fine visage of this young
scholar to make it suit thy traitor?  Ask him rather to turn his eyes
upward, and thou mayst make a Saint Sebastian of him that will draw
troops of devout women; or, if thou art in a classical vein, put myrtle
about his curls and make him a young Bacchus, or say rather a Phoebus
Apollo, for his face is as warm and bright as a summer morning; it made
me his friend in the space of a `credo.'"

"Ay, Nello," said the painter, speaking with abrupt pauses; "and if thy
tongue can leave off its everlasting chirping long enough for thy
understanding to consider the matter, thou mayst see that thou hast just
shown the reason why the face of Messere will suit my traitor.  A
perfect traitor should have a face which vice can write no marks on--
lips that will lie with a dimpled smile--eyes of such agate-like
brightness and depth that no infamy can dull them--cheeks that will rise
from a murder and not look haggard.  I say not this young man is a
traitor: I mean, he has a face that would make him the more perfect
traitor if he had the heart of one, which is saying neither more nor
less than that he has a beautiful face, informed with rich young blood,
that will be nourished enough by food, and keep its colour without much
help of virtue.  He may have the heart of a hero along with it; I aver
nothing to the contrary.  Ask Domenico there if the lapidaries can
always tell a gem by the sight alone.  And now I'm going to put the tow
in my ears, for thy chatter and the bells together are more than I can
endure: so say no more to me, but trim my beard."

With these last words Piero (called "di Cosimo," from his master, Cosimo
Rosselli) drew out two bits of tow, stuffed them in his ears, and placed
himself in the chair before Nello, who shrugged his shoulders and cast a
grimacing look of intelligence at the Greek, as much as to say, "A
whimsical fellow, you perceive!  Everybody holds his speeches as mere
jokes."

Tito, who had stood transfixed, with his long dark eyes resting on the
unknown man who had addressed him so equivocally, seemed recalled to his
self-command by Piero's change of position, and apparently satisfied
with his explanation, was again giving his attention to Cennini, who
presently said--

"This is a curious and valuable ring, young man.  This intaglio of the
fish with the crested serpent above it, in the black stratum of the
onyx, or rather nicolo, is well shown by the surrounding blue of the
upper stratum.  The ring has, doubtless, a history?" added Cennini,
looking up keenly at the young stranger.

"Yes, indeed," said Tito, meeting the scrutiny very frankly.  "The ring
was found in Sicily, and I have understood from those who busy
themselves with gems and sigils, that both the stone and intaglio are of
virtue to make the wearer fortunate, especially at sea, and also to
restore to him whatever he may have lost.  But," he continued, smiling,
"though I have worn it constantly since I quitted Greece, it has not
made me altogether fortunate at sea, you perceive, unless I am to count
escape from drowning as a sufficient proof of its virtue.  It remains to
be seen whether my lost chests will come to light; but to lose no chance
of such a result, Messer, I will pray you only to hold the ring for a
short space as pledge for a small sum far beneath its value, and I will
redeem it as soon as I can dispose of certain other gems which are
secured within my doublet, or indeed as soon as I can earn something by
any scholarly employment, if I may be so fortunate as to meet with
such."

"That may be seen, young man, if you will come with me," said Cennini.
"My brother Pietro, who is a better judge of scholarship than I, will
perhaps be able to supply you with a task that may test your
capabilities.  Meanwhile, take back your ring until I can hand you the
necessary florins, and, if it please you, come along with me."

"Yes, yes," said Nello, "go with Messer Domenico, you cannot go in
better company; he was born under the constellation that gives a man
skill, riches, and integrity, whatever that constellation may be, which
is of the less consequence because babies can't choose their own
horoscopes, and, indeed, if they could, there might be an inconvenient
rush of babies at particular epochs.  Besides, our Phoenix, the
incomparable Pico, has shown that your horoscopes are all a nonsensical
dream--which is the less troublesome opinion.  _Addio! bel giovane_!
don't forget to come back to me."

"No fear of that," said Tito, beckoning a farewell, as he turned round
his bright face at the door.  "You are to do me a great service:--that
is the most positive security for your seeing me again."

"Say what thou wilt, Piero," said Nello, as the young stranger
disappeared, "I shall never look at such an outside as that without
taking it as a sign of a lovable nature.  Why, thou wilt say next that
Leonardo, whom thou art always raving about, ought to have made his
Judas as beautiful as Saint John!  But thou art as deaf as the top of
Mount Morello with that accursed tow in thy ears.  Well, well: I'll get
a little more of this young man's history from him before I take him to
Bardo Bardi."



CHAPTER FIVE.

THE BLIND SCHOLAR AND HIS DAUGHTER.

The Via de' Bardi, a street noted in the history of Florence, lies in
Oltrarno, or that portion of the city which clothes the southern bank of
the river.  It extends from the Ponte Vecchio to the Piazza de' Mozzi at
the head of the Ponte alle Grazie; its right-hand line of houses and
walls being backed by the rather steep ascent which in the fifteenth
century was known as the hill of Bogoli, the famous stone-quarry whence
the city got its pavement--of dangerously unstable consistence when
penetrated by rains; its left-hand buildings flanking the river and
making on their northern side a length of quaint, irregularly-pierced
facade, of which the waters give a softened loving reflection as the sun
begins to decline towards the western heights.  But quaint as these
buildings are, some of them seem to the historical memory a too modern
substitute for the famous houses of the Bardi family, destroyed by
popular rage in the middle of the fourteenth century.

They were a proud and energetic stock, these Bardi; conspicuous among
those who clutched the sword in the earliest world-famous quarrels of
Florentines with Florentines, when the narrow streets were darkened with
the high towers of the nobles, and when the old tutelar god Mars, as he
saw the gutters reddened with neighbours' blood, might well have smiled
at the centuries of lip-service paid to his rival, the Baptist.  But the
Bardi hands were of the sort that not only clutch the sword-hilt with
vigour, but love the more delicate pleasure of fingering minted metal:
they were matched, too, with true Florentine eyes, capable of discerning
that power was to be won by other means than by rending and riving, and
by the middle of the fourteenth century we find them risen from their
original condition of _popolani_ to be possessors, by purchase, of lands
and strongholds, and the feudal dignity of Counts of Vernio, disturbing
to the jealousy of their republican fellow-citizens.  These lordly
purchases are explained by our seeing the Bardi disastrously signalised
only a few years later as standing in the very front of European
commerce--the Christian Rothschilds of that time--undertaking to furnish
specie for the wars of our Edward the Third, and having revenues "in
kind" made over to them; especially in wool, most precious of freights
for Florentine galleys.  Their august debtor left them with an august
deficit, and alarmed Sicilian creditors made a too sudden demand for the
payment of deposits, causing a ruinous shock to the credit of the Bardi
and of associated houses, which was felt as a commercial calamity along
all the coasts of the Mediterranean.  But, like more modern bankrupts,
they did not, for all that, hide their heads in humiliation; on the
contrary, they seemed to have held them higher than ever, and to have
been among the most arrogant of those grandees, who under certain
noteworthy circumstances, open to all who will read the honest pages of
Giovanni Villani, drew upon themselves the exasperation of the armed
people in 1343.  The Bardi, who had made themselves fast in their street
between the two bridges, kept these narrow inlets, like panthers at bay,
against the oncoming gonfalons of the people, and were only made to give
way by an assault from the hill behind them.  Their houses by the river,
to the number of twenty-two (_palagi e case grandi_), were sacked and
burnt, and many among the chief of those who bore the Bardi name were
driven from the city.  But an old Florentine family was many-rooted, and
we find the Bardi maintaining importance and rising again and again to
the surface of Florentine affairs in a more or less creditable manner,
implying an untold family history that would have included even more
vicissitudes and contrasts of dignity and disgrace, of wealth and
poverty, than are usually seen on the background of wide kinship.  [Note
1.]  But the Bardi never resumed their proprietorship in the old street
on the banks of the river, which in 1492 had long been associated with
other names of mark, and especially with the Neri, who possessed a
considerable range of houses on the side towards the hill.

In one of these Neri houses there lived, however, a descendant of the
Bardi, and of that very branch which a century and a half before had
become Counts of Vernio: a descendant who had inherited the old family
pride and energy, the old love of pre-eminence, the old desire to leave
a lasting track of his footsteps on the fast-whirling earth.  But the
family passions lived on in him under altered conditions: this
descendant of the Bardi was not a man swift in street warfare, or one
who loved to play the signor, fortifying strongholds and asserting the
right to hang vassals, or a merchant and usurer of keen daring, who
delighted in the generalship of wide commercial schemes: he was a man
with a deep-veined hand cramped by much copying of manuscripts, who ate
sparing dinners, and wore threadbare clothes, at first from choice and
at last from necessity; who sat among his books and his marble fragments
of the past, and saw them only by the light of those far-off younger
days which still shone in his memory: he was a moneyless, blind old
scholar--the Bardo de' Bardi to whom Nello, the barber, had promised to
introduce the young Greek, Tito Melema.

The house in which Bardo lived was situated on the side of the street
nearest the hill, and was one of those large sombre masses of stone
building pierced by comparatively small windows, and surmounted by what
may be called a roofed terrace or loggia, of which there are many
examples still to be seen in the venerable city.  Grim doors, with
conspicuous scrolled hinges, having high up on each side of them a small
window defended by iron bars, opened on a groined entrance-court, empty
of everything but a massive lamp-iron suspended from the centre of the
groin.  A smaller grim door on the left-hand admitted to the stone
staircase, and the rooms on the ground-floor.  These last were used as a
warehouse by the proprietor; so was the first floor; and both were
filled with precious stores, destined to be carried, some perhaps to the
banks of the Scheldt, some to the shores of Africa, some to the isles of
the Aegean, or to the banks of the Euxine.  Maso, the old serving-man,
when he returned from the Mercato with the stock of cheap vegetables,
had to make his slow way up to the second storey before he reached the
door of his master, Bardo, through which we are about to enter only a
few mornings after Nello's conversation with the Greek.

We follow Maso across the ante-chamber to the door on the left-hand,
through which we pass as he opens it.  He merely looks in and nods,
while a clear young voice says, "Ah, you are come back, Maso.  It is
well.  We have wanted nothing."

The voice came from the farther end of a long, spacious room, surrounded
with shelves, on which books and antiquities were arranged in scrupulous
order.  Here and there, on separate stands in front of the shelves, were
placed a beautiful feminine torso; a headless statue, with an uplifted
muscular arm wielding a bladeless sword; rounded, dimpled, infantine
limbs severed from the trunk, inviting the lips to kiss the cold marble;
some well-preserved Roman busts; and two or three vases from Magna
Grecia.  A large table in the centre was covered with antique bronze
lamps and small vessels in dark pottery.  The colour of these objects
was chiefly pale or sombre: the vellum bindings, with their deep-ridged
backs, gave little relief to the marble, livid with long burial; the
once splendid patch of carpet at the farther end of the room had long
been worn to dimness; the dark bronzes wanted sunlight upon them to
bring out their tinge of green, and the sun was not yet high enough to
send gleams of brightness through the narrow windows that looked on the
Via de' Bardi.

The only spot of bright colour in the room was made by the hair of a
tall maiden of seventeen or eighteen, who was standing before a carved
_leggio_, or reading-desk, such as is often seen in the choirs of
Italian churches.  The hair was of a reddish gold colour, enriched by an
unbroken small ripple, such as may be seen in the sunset clouds on
grandest autumnal evenings.  It was confined by a black fillet above her
small ears, from which it rippled forward again, and made a natural veil
for her neck above her square-cut gown of black _rascia_, or serge.  Her
eyes were bent on a large volume placed before her: one long white hand
rested on the reading, desk, and the other clasped the back of her
father's chair.

The blind father sat with head uplifted and turned a little aside
towards his daughter, as if he were looking at her.  His delicate
paleness, set off by the black velvet cap which surmounted his drooping
white hair, made all the more perceptible the likeness between his aged
features and those of the young maiden, whose cheeks were also without
any tinge of the rose.  There was the same refinement of brow and
nostril in both, counterbalanced by a full though firm mouth and
powerful chin, which gave an expression of proud tenacity and latent
impetuousness: an expression carried out in the backward poise of the
girl's head, and the grand line of her neck and shoulders.  It was a
type of face of which one could not venture to say whether it would
inspire love or only that unwilling admiration which is mixed with
dread: the question must be decided by the eyes, which often seem
charged with a more direct message from the soul.  But the eyes of the
father had long been silent, and the eyes of the daughter were bent on
the Latin pages of Politian's `Miscellanea,' from which she was reading
aloud at the eightieth chapter, to the following effect:--

"There was a certain nymph of Thebes named Chariclo, especially dear to
Pallas; and this nymph was the mother of Teiresias.  But once when in
the heat of summer, Pallas, in company with Chariclo, was bathing her
disrobed limbs in the Heliconian Hippocrene, it happened that Teiresias
coming as a hunter to quench his thirst at the same fountain,
inadvertently beheld Minerva unveiled, and immediately became blind.
For it is declared in the Saturnian laws, that he who beholds the gods
against their will, shall atone for it by a heavy penalty...  When
Teiresias had fallen into this calamity, Pallas, moved by the tears of
Chariclo, endowed him with prophecy and length of days, and even caused
his prudence and wisdom to continue after he had entered among the
shades, so that an oracle spake from his tomb: and she gave him a staff,
wherewith, as by a guide, he might walk without stumbling...  And hence,
Nonnus, in the fifth book of the `Dionysiaca,' introduces Actreon
exclaiming that he calls Teiresias happy, since, without dying, and with
the loss of his eyesight merely, he had beheld Minerva unveiled, and
thus, though blind, could for evermore carry her image in his soul."

At this point in the reading, the daughter's hand slipped from the back
of the chair and met her father's, which he had that moment uplifted;
but she had not looked round, and was going on, though with a voice a
little altered by some suppressed feeling, to read the Greek quotation
from Nonnus, when the old man said--

"Stay, Romola; reach me my own copy of Nonnus.  It is a more correct
copy than any in Poliziano's hands, for I made emendations in it which
have not yet been communicated to any man.  I finished it in 1477, when
my sight was fast failing me."

Romola walked to the farther end of the room, with the queenly step
which was the simple action of her tall, finely-wrought frame, without
the slightest conscious adjustment of herself.

"Is it in the right place, Romola?" asked Bardo, who was perpetually
seeking the assurance that the outward fact continued to correspond with
the image which lived to the minutest detail in his mind.

"Yes, father; at the west end of the room, on the third shelf from the
bottom, behind the bust of Hadrian, above Apollonius Rhodius and
Callimachus, and below Lucan and Silius Italious."

As Romola said this, a fine ear would have detected in her clear voice
and distinct utterance, a faint suggestion of weariness struggling with
habitual patience.  But as she approached her father and saw his arms
stretched out a little with nervous excitement to seize the volume, her
hazel eyes filled with pity; she hastened to lay the book on his lap,
and kneeled down by him, looking up at him as if she believed that the
love in her face must surely make its way through the dark obstruction
that shut out everything else.  At that moment the doubtful
attractiveness of Romola's face, in which pride and passion seemed to be
quivering in the balance with native refinement and intelligence, was
transfigured to the most lovable womanliness by mingled pity and
affection: it was evident that the deepest fount of feeling within her
had not yet wrought its way to the less changeful features, and only
found its outlet through her eyes.

But the father, unconscious of that soft radiance, looked flushed and
agitated as his hand explored the edges and back of the large book.

"The vellum is yellowed in these thirteen years, Romola."

"Yes, father," said Romola, gently; "but your letters at the back are
dark and plain still--fine Roman letters; and the Greek character," she
continued, laying the book open on her father's knee, "is more beautiful
than that of any of your bought manuscripts."

"Assuredly, child," said Bardo, passing his finger across the page, as
if he hoped to discriminate line and margin.  "What hired amanuensis can
be equal to the scribe who loves the words that grow under his hand, and
to whom an error or indistinctness in the text is more painful than a
sudden darkness or obstacle across his path?  And even these mechanical
printers who threaten to make learning a base and vulgar thing--even
they must depend on the manuscript over which we scholars have bent with
that insight into the poet's meaning which is closely akin to the _mens
divinior_ of the poet himself; unless they would flood the world with
grammatical falsities and inexplicable anomalies that would turn the
very fountain of Parnassus into a deluge of poisonous mud.  But find the
passage in the fifth book, to which Poliziano refers--I know it very
well."

Seating herself on a low stool, close to her father's knee, Romola took
the book on her lap and read the four verses containing the exclamation
of Actreon.

"It is true, Romola," said Bardo, when she had finished; "it is a true
conception of the poet; for what is that grosser, narrower light by
which men behold merely the petty scene around them, compared with that
far-stretching, lasting light which spreads over centuries of thought,
and over the life of nations, and makes clear to us the minds of the
immortals who have reaped the great harvest and left us to glean in
their furrows?  For me, Romola, even when I could see, it was with the
great dead that I lived; while the living often seemed to me mere
spectres--shadows dispossessed of true feeling and intelligence; and
unlike those Lamiae, to whom Poliziano, with that superficial ingenuity
which I do not deny to him, compares our inquisitive Florentines,
because they put on their eyes when they went abroad, and took them off
when they got home again, I have returned from the converse of the
streets as from a forgotten dream, and have sat down among my books,
saying with Petrarca, the modern who is least unworthy to be named after
the ancients, `Libri medullitus delectant, colloquuntur, consulunt, et
viva quadam nobis atque arguta familiaritate junguntur.'"

"And in one thing you are happier than your favourite Petrarca, father,"
said Romola, affectionately humouring the old man's disposition to
dilate in this way; "for he used to look at his copy of Homer and think
sadly that the Greek was a dead letter to him: so far, he had the inward
blindness that you feel is worse than your outward blindness."

"True, child; for I carry within me the fruits of that fervid study
which I gave to the Greek tongue under the teaching of the younger
Crisolora, and Filelfo, and Argiropulo; though that great work in which
I had desired to gather, as into a firm web, all the threads that my
research had laboriously disentangled, and which would have been the
vintage of my life, was cut off by the failure of my sight and my want
of a fitting coadjutor.  For the sustained zeal and unconquerable
patience demanded from those who would tread the unbeaten paths of
knowledge are still less reconcilable with the wandering, vagrant
propensity of the feminine mind than with the feeble powers of the
feminine body."

"Father," said Romola, with a sudden flush and in an injured tone, "I
read anything you wish me to read; and I will look out any passages for
you, and make whatever notes you want."

Bardo shook his head, and smiled with a bitter sort of pity.  "As well
try to be a pentathlos and perform all the five feats of the palaestra
with the limbs of a nymph.  Have I forgotten thy fainting in the mere
search for the references I needed to explain a single passage of
Callimachus?"

"But, father, it was the weight of the books, and Maso can help me; it
was not want of attention and patience."

Bardo shook his head again.  "It is not mere bodily organs that I want:
it is the sharp edge of a young mind to pierce the way for my somewhat
blunted faculties.  For blindness acts like a dam, sending the streams
of thought backward along the already-travelled channels and hindering
the course onward.  If my son had not forsaken me, deluded by debasing
fanatical dreams, worthy only of an energumen whose dwelling is among
tombs, I might have gone on and seen my path broadening to the end of my
life; for he was a youth of great promise.  But it has closed in now,"
the old man continued, after a short pause; "it has closed in now;--all
but the narrow track he has left me to tread--alone in my blindness."

Romola started from her seat, and carried away the large volume to its
place again, stung too acutely by her father's last words to remain
motionless as well as silent; and when she turned away from the shelf
again, she remained standing at some distance from him, stretching her
arms downwards and clasping her fingers tightly as she looked with a sad
dreariness in her young face at the lifeless objects around her--the
parchment backs, the unchanging mutilated marble, the bits of obsolete
bronze and clay.

Bardo, though usually susceptible to Romola's movements and eager to
trace them, was now too entirely preoccupied by the pain of rankling
memories to notice her departure from his side.

"Yes," he went on, "with my son to aid me, I might have had my due share
in the triumphs of this century: the names of the Bardi, father and son,
might have been held reverently on the lips of scholars in the ages to
come; not on account of frivolous verses or philosophical treatises,
which are superfluous and presumptuous attempts to imitate the
inimitable, such as allure vain men like Panhormita, and from which even
the admirable Poggio did not keep himself sufficiently free; but because
we should have given a lamp whereby men might have studied the supreme
productions of the past.  For why is a young man like Poliziano (who was
not yet born when I was already held worthy to maintain a discussion
with Thomas of Sarzana) to have a glorious memory as a commentator on
the Pandects--why is Ficino, whose Latin is an offence to me, and who
wanders purblind among the superstitious fancies that marked the decline
at once of art, literature, and philosophy, to descend to posterity as
the very high priest of Platonism, while I, who am more than their
equal, have not effected anything but scattered work, which will be
appropriated by other men?  Why? but because my son, whom I had brought
up to replenish my ripe learning with young enterprise, left me and all
liberal pursuits that he might lash himself and howl at midnight with
besotted friars--that he might go wandering on pilgrimages befitting men
who know of no past older than the missal and the crucifix?--left me
when the night was already beginning to fall on me."

In these last words the old man's voice, which had risen high in
indignant protest, fell into a tone of reproach so tremulous and
plaintive that Romola, turning her eyes again towards the blind aged
face, felt her heart swell with forgiving pity.  She seated herself by
her father again, and placed her hand on his knee--too proud to obtrude
consolation in words that might seem like a vindication of her own
value, yet wishing to comfort him by some sign of her presence.

"Yes, Romola," said Bardo, automatically letting his left-hand, with its
massive prophylactic rings, fall a little too heavily on the delicate
blue-veined back of the girl's right, so that she bit her lip to prevent
herself from starting.  "If even Florence only is to remember me, it can
but be on the same ground that it will remember Niccolo Niccoli--because
I forsook the vulgar pursuit of wealth in commerce that I might devote
myself to collecting the precious remains of ancient art and wisdom, and
leave them, after the example of the munificent Romans, for an
everlasting possession to my fellow-citizens.  But why do I say Florence
only?  If Florence remembers me, will not the world remember me? ...
Yet," added Bardo, after a short pause, his voice falling again into a
saddened key, "Lorenzo's untimely death has raised a new difficulty.  I
had his promise--I should have had his bond--that my collection should
always bear my name and should never be sold, though the harpies might
clutch everything else; but there is enough for them--there is more than
enough--and for thee, too, Romola, there will be enough.  Besides, thou
wilt marry; Bernardo reproaches me that I do not seek a fitting
_parentado_ for thee, and we will delay no longer, we will think about
it."

"No, no, father; what could you do? besides, it is useless: wait till
some one seeks me," said Romola, hastily.

"Nay, my child, that is not the paternal duty.  It was not so held by
the ancients, and in this respect Florentines have not degenerated from
their ancestral customs."

"But I will study diligently," said Romola, her eyes dilating with
anxiety.  "I will become as learned as Cassandra Fedele: I will try and
be as useful to you as if I had been a boy, and then perhaps some great
scholar will want to marry me, and will not mind about a dowry; and he
will like to come and live with you, and he will be to you in place of
my brother... and you will not be sorry that I was a daughter."

There was a rising sob in Romola's voice as she said the last words,
which touched the fatherly fibre in Bardo.  He stretched his hand upward
a little in search of her golden hair, and as she placed her head under
his hand, he gently stroked it, leaning towards her as if his eyes
discerned some glimmer there.

"Nay, Romola mia, I said not so; if I have pronounced an anathema on a
degenerate and ungrateful son, I said not that I could wish thee other
than the sweet daughter thou hast been to me.  For what son could have
tended me so gently in the frequent sickness I have had of late?  And
even in learning thou art not, according to thy measure, contemptible.
Something perhaps were to be wished in thy capacity of attention and
memory, not incompatible even with the feminine mind.  But as Calcondila
bore testimony, when he aided me to teach thee, thou hast a ready
apprehension, and even a wide-glancing intelligence.  And thou hast a
man's nobility of soul: thou hast never fretted me with thy petty
desires as thy mother did.  It is true, I have been careful to keep thee
aloof from the debasing influence of thy own sex, with their
sparrow-like frivolity and their enslaving superstition, except, indeed,
from that of our cousin Brigida, who may well serve as a scarecrow and a
warning.  And though--since I agree with the divine Petrarca, when he
declares, quoting the `Aulularia' of Plautus, who again was indebted for
the truth to the supreme Greek intellect, `Optimam foeminam nullam esse,
alia licet alia pejor sit'--I cannot boast that thou art entirely lifted
out of that lower category to which Nature assigned thee, nor even that
in erudition thou art on a par with the more learned women of this age;
thou art, nevertheless--yes, Romola mia," said the old man, his pedantry
again melting into tenderness, "thou art my sweet daughter, and thy
voice is as the lower notes of the flute, `dulcis, durabilis, clara,
pura, secans aera et auribus sedens,' according to the choice words of
Quintilian; and Bernardo tells me thou art fair, and thy hair is like
the brightness of the morning, and indeed it seems to me that I discern
some radiance from thee.  Ah!  I know how all else looks in this room,
but thy form I only guess at.  Thou art no longer the little woman six
years old, that faded for me into darkness; thou art tall, and thy arm
is but little below mine.  Let us walk together."

The old man rose, and Romola, soothed by these beams of tenderness,
looked happy again as she drew his arm within hers, and placed in his
right-hand the stick which rested at the side of his chair.  While Bardo
had been sitting, he had seemed hardly more than sixty: his face, though
pale, had that refined texture in which wrinkles and lines are never
deep; but now that he began to walk he looked as old as he really was--
rather more than seventy; for his tall spare frame had the student's
stoop of the shoulders, and he stepped with the undecided gait of the
blind.

"No, Romola," he said, pausing against the bust of Hadrian, and passing
his stick from the right to the left that he might explore the familiar
outline with a "seeing hand."

"There will be nothing else to preserve my memory and carry down my name
as a member of the great republic of letters--nothing but my library and
my collection of antiquities.  And they are choice," continued Bardo,
pressing the bust and speaking in a tone of insistance.  "The
collections of Niccolo I know were larger; but take any collection which
is the work of a single man--that of the great Boccaccio even--mine will
surpass it.  That of Poggio was contemptible compared with mine.  It
will be a great gift to unborn scholars.  And there is nothing else.
For even if I were to yield to the wish of Aldo Manuzio when he sets up
his press at Venice, and give him the aid of my annotated manuscripts, I
know well what would be the result: some other scholar's name would
stand on the title-page of the edition--some scholar who would have fed
on my honey, and then declared in his preface that he had gathered it
all himself fresh from Hymettus.  Else, why have I refused the loan of
many an annotated codex? why have I refused to make public any of my
translations? why? but because scholarship is a system of licenced
robbery, and your man in scarlet and furred robe who sits in judgment on
thieves, is himself a thief of the thoughts and the fame that belong to
his fellows.  But against that robbery Bardo de' Bardi shall struggle--
though blind and forsaken, he shall struggle.  I too have a right to be
remembered--as great a right as Pontanus or Merula, whose names will be
foremost on the lips of posterity, because they sought patronage and
found it; because they had tongues that could flatter, and blood that
was used to be nourished from the client's basket.  I have a right to be
remembered."

The old man's voice had become at once loud and tremulous, and a pink
flush overspread his proud, delicately-cut features, while the
habitually raised attitude of his head gave the idea that behind the
curtain of his blindness he saw some imaginary high tribunal to which he
was appealing against the injustice of Fame.

Romola was moved with sympathetic indignation, for in her nature too
there lay the same large claims, and the same spirit of struggle against
their denial.  She tried to calm her father by a still prouder word than
his.

"Nevertheless, father, it is a great gift of the gods to be born with a
hatred and contempt of all injustice and meanness.  Yours is a higher
lot, never to have lied and truckled, than to have shared honours won by
dishonour.  There is strength in scorn, as there was in the martial fury
by which men became insensible to wounds."

"It is well said, Romola.  It is a Promethean word thou hast uttered,"
answered Bardo, after a little interval in which he had begun to lean on
his stick again, and to walk on.  "And I indeed am not to be pierced by
the shafts of Fortune.  My armour is the _aes triplex_ of a clear
conscience, and a mind nourished by the precepts of philosophy.  `For
men,' says Epictetus, `are disturbed not by things themselves, but by
their opinions or thoughts concerning those things.'  And again,
`whosoever will be free, let him not desire or dread that which it is in
the power of others either to deny or inflict: otherwise, he is a
slave.'  And of all such gifts as are dependent on the caprice of
fortune or of men, I have long ago learned to say, with Horace--who,
however, is too wavering in his philosophy, vacillating between the
precepts of Zeno and the less worthy maxims of Epicurus, and attempting,
as we say, `duabus sellis sedere'--concerning such accidents, I say,
with the pregnant brevity of the poet--

"`Sunt qui non habeant, est qui non curat habere.'

"He is referring to gems, and purple, and other insignia of wealth; but
I may apply his words not less justly to the tributes men pay us with
their lips and their pens, which are also matters of purchase, and often
with base coin.  Yes, `_inanis_'--hollow, empty--is the epithet justly
bestowed on Fame."

They made the tour of the room in silence after this; but Bardo's
lip-born maxims were as powerless over the passion which had been moving
him, as if they had been written on parchment and hung round his neck in
a sealed bag; and he presently broke forth again in a new tone of
insistance.

"_Inanis_? yes, if it is a lying fame; but not if it is the just meed of
labour and a great purpose.  I claim my right: it is not fair that the
work of my brain and my hands should not be a monument to me--it is not
just that my labour should bear the name of another man.  It is but
little to ask," the old man went on, bitterly, "that my name should be
over the door--that men should own themselves debtors to the Bardi
Library in Florence.  They will speak coldly of me, perhaps: `a diligent
collector and transcriber,' they will say, `and also of some critical
ingenuity, but one who could hardly be conspicuous in an age so fruitful
in illustrious scholars.  Yet he merits our pity, for in the latter
years of his life he was blind, and his only son, to whose education he
had devoted his best years--' Nevertheless, my name will be remembered,
and men will honour me: not with the breath of flattery, purchased by
mean bribes, but because I have laboured, and because my labours will
remain.  Debts!  I know there are debts; and there is thy dowry, Romola,
to be paid.  But there must be enough--or, at least, there can lack but
a small sum, such as the Signoria might well provide.  And if Lorenzo
had not died, all would have been secured and settled.  But now..."

At this moment Maso opened the door, and advancing to his master,
announced that Nello, the barber, had desired him to say, that he was
come with the Greek scholar whom he had asked leave to introduce.

"It is well," said the old man.  "Bring them in."

Bardo, conscious that he looked more dependent when he was walking,
liked always to be seated in the presence of strangers, and Romola,
without needing to be told, conducted him to his chair.  She was
standing by him at her full height, in quiet majestic self-possession,
when the visitors entered; and the most penetrating observer would
hardly have divined that this proud pale face, at the slightest touch on
the fibres of affection or pity, could become passionate with
tenderness, or that this woman, who imposed a certain awe on those who
approached her, was in a state of girlish simplicity and ignorance
concerning the world outside her father's books.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Note 1.  A sign that such contrasts were peculiarly frequent in
Florence, is the fact that Saint Antonine, Prior of San Marco, and
afterwards archbishop, in the first half of this fifteenth century,
founded the society of Buonuomini di San Martino (Good Men of Saint
Martin) with the main object of succouring the _poveri vergognosi_--in
other words, paupers of good family.  In the records of the famous
Panciatichi family we find a certain Girolamo in this century who was
reduced to such a state of poverty that he was obliged to seek charity
for the mere means of sustaining life, though other members of his
family were enormously wealthy.



CHAPTER SIX.

DAWNING HOPES.

When Maso opened the door again, and ushered in the two visitors, Nello,
first making a deep reverence to Romola, gently pushed Tito before him,
and advanced with him towards her father.

"Messer Bardo," he said, in a more measured and respectful tone than was
usual with him, "I have the honour of presenting to you the Greek
scholar, who has been eager to have speech of you, not less from the
report I have made to him of your learning and your priceless
collections, than because of the furtherance your patronage may give him
under the transient need to which he has been reduced by shipwreck.  His
name is Tito Melema, at your service."

Romola's astonishment could hardly have been greater if the stranger had
worn a panther-skin and carried a thyrsus; for the cunning barber had
said nothing of the Greek's age or appearance; and among her father's
scholarly visitors, she had hardly ever seen any but middle-aged or
grey-headed men.  There was only one masculine face, at once youthful
and beautiful, the image of which remained deeply impressed on her mind:
it was that of her brother, who long years ago had taken her on his
knee, kissed her, and never come back again: a fair face, with sunny
hair, like her own.  But the habitual attitude of her mind towards
strangers--a proud self-dependence and determination to ask for nothing
even by a smile--confirmed in her by her father's complaints against the
world's injustice, was like a snowy embankment hemming in the rush of
admiring surprise.  Tito's bright face showed its rich-tinted beauty
without any rivalry of colour above his black _sajo_ or tunic reaching
to the knees.  It seemed like a wreath of spring, dropped suddenly in
Romola's young but wintry life, which had inherited nothing but
memories--memories of a dead mother, of a lost brother, of a blind
father's happier time--memories of far-off light, love, and beauty, that
lay embedded in dark mines of books, and could hardly give out their
brightness again until they were kindled for her by the torch of some
known joy.  Nevertheless, she returned Tito's bow, made to her on
entering, with the same pale proud face as ever; but, as he approached,
the snow melted, and when he ventured to look towards her again, while
Nello was speaking, a pink flush overspread her face, to vanish again
almost immediately, as if her imperious will had recalled it.  Tito's
glance, on the contrary, had that gentle, beseeching admiration in it
which is the most propitiating of appeals to a proud, shy woman, and is
perhaps the only atonement a man can make for being too handsome.  The
finished fascination of his air came chiefly from the absence of demand
and assumption.  It was that of a fleet, soft-coated, dark-eyed animal
that delights you by not bounding away in indifference from you, and
unexpectedly pillows its chin on your palm, and looks up at you desiring
to be stroked--as if it loved you.

"Messere, I give you welcome," said Bardo, with some condescension;
"misfortune wedded to learning, and especially to Greek learning, is a
letter of credit that should win the ear of every instructed Florentine;
for, as you are doubtless aware, since the period when your countryman,
Manuelo Crisolora, diffused the light of his teaching in the chief
cities of Italy, now nearly a century ago, no man is held worthy of the
name of scholar who has acquired merely the transplanted and derivative
literature of the Latins; rather, such inert students are stigmatised as
_opici_ or barbarians according to the phrase of the Romans themselves,
who frankly replenished their urns at the fountain-head.  I am, as you
perceive, and as Nello has doubtless forewarned you, totally blind: a
calamity to which we Florentines are held especially liable, whether
owing to the cold winds which rush upon us in spring from the passes of
the Apennines, or to that sudden transition from the cool gloom of our
houses to the dazzling brightness of our summer sun, by which the
_lippi_ are said to have been made so numerous among the ancient Romans;
or, in fine, to some occult cause which eludes our superficial surmises.
But I pray you be seated: Nello, my friend, be seated."

Bardo paused until his fine ear had assured him that the visitors were
seating themselves, and that Romola was taking her usual chair at his
right-hand.  Then he said--

"From what part of Greece do you come, Messere?  I had thought that your
unhappy country had been almost exhausted of those sons who could
cherish in their minds any image of her original glory, though indeed
the barbarous Sultans have of late shown themselves not indisposed to
engraft on their wild stock the precious vine which their own fierce
bands have hewn down and trampled under foot.  From what part of Greece
do you come?"

"I sailed last from Nauplia," said Tito; "but I have resided both at
Constantinople and Thessalonica, and have travelled in various parts
little visited by Western Christians since the triumph of the Turkish
arms.  I should tell you, however, Messere, that I was not born in
Greece, but at Bari.  I spent the first sixteen years of my life in
Southern Italy and Sicily."

While Tito was speaking, some emotion passed, like a breath on the
waters, across Bardo's delicate features; he leaned forward, put out his
right-hand towards Romola, and turned his head as if about to speak to
her; but then, correcting himself, turned away again, and said, in a
subdued voice--

"Excuse me; is it not true--you are young?"

"I am three-and-twenty," said Tito.

"Ah," said Bardo, still in a tone of subdued excitement, "and you had,
doubtless, a father who cared for your early instruction--who, perhaps,
was himself a scholar?"

There was a slight pause before Tito's answer came to the ear of Bardo;
but for Romola and Nello it began with a slight shock that seemed to
pass through him, and cause a momentary quivering of the lip; doubtless
at the revival of a supremely painful remembrance.

"Yes," he replied, "at least a father by adoption.  He was a Neapolitan,
and of accomplished scholarship, both Latin and Greek.  But," added
Tito, after another slight pause, "he is lost to me--was lost on a
voyage he too rashly undertook to Delos."

Bardo sank backward again, too delicate to ask another question that
might probe a sorrow which he divined to be recent.  Romola, who knew
well what were the fibres that Tito's voice had stirred in her father,
felt that this new acquaintance had with wonderful suddenness got within
the barrier that lay between them and the alien world.  Nello, thinking
that the evident check given to the conversation offered a graceful
opportunity for relieving himself from silence, said--

"In truth, it is as clear as Venetian glass that this fine young man has
had the best training; for the two Cennini have set him to work at their
Greek sheets already, and it seems to me they are not men to begin
cutting before they have felt the edge of their tools; they tested him
well beforehand, we may be sure, and if there are two things not to be
hidden--love and a cough--I say there is a third, and that is ignorance,
when once a man is obliged to do something besides wagging his head.
The _tonsor inequalis_ is inevitably betrayed when he takes the shears
in his hand; is it not true, Messer Bardo?  I speak after the fashion of
a barber, but, as Luigi Pulci says--

  "`Perdonimi s'io fallo: chi m'ascolta
  Intenda il mio volgar col suo latino.'"

"Nay, my good Nello," said Bardo, with an air of friendly severity, "you
are not altogether illiterate, and might doubtless have made a more
respectable progress in learning if you had abstained somewhat from the
_cicalata_ and gossip of the street-corner, to which our Florentines are
excessively addicted; but still more if you had not clogged your memory
with those frivolous productions of which Luigi Pulci has furnished the
most peccant exemplar--a compendium of extravagances and incongruities
the farthest removed from the models of a pure age, and resembling
rather the _grylli_ or conceits of a period when mystic meaning was held
a warrant for monstrosity of form; with this difference, that while the
monstrosity is retained, the mystic meaning is absent; in contemptible
contrast with the great poem of Virgil, who, as I long held with
Filelfo, before Landino had taken upon him to expound the same opinion,
embodied the deepest lessons of philosophy in a graceful and well-knit
fable.  And I cannot but regard the multiplication of these babbling,
lawless productions, albeit countenanced by the patronage, and in some
degree the example of Lorenzo himself, otherwise a friend to true
learning, as a sign that the glorious hopes of this century are to be
quenched in gloom; nay, that they have been the delusive prologue to an
age worse than that of iron--the age of tinsel and gossamer, in which no
thought has substance enough to be moulded into consistent and lasting
form."

"Once more, pardon," said Nello, opening his palms outwards, and
shrugging his shoulders, "I find myself knowing so many things in good
Tuscan before I have time to think of the Latin for them; and Messer
Luigi's rhymes are always slipping off the lips of my customers:--that
is what corrupts me.  And, indeed, talking of customers, I have left my
shop and my reputation too long in the custody of my slow Sandro, who
does not deserve even to be called a _tonsor inequalis_, but rather to
be pronounced simply a bungler in the vulgar tongue.  So with your
permission, Messer Bardo, I will take my leave--well understood that I
am at your service whenever Maso calls upon me.  It seems a thousand
years till I dress and perfume the damigella's hair, which deserves to
shine in the heavens as a constellation, though indeed it were a pity
for it ever to go so far out of reach."

Three voices made a fugue of friendly farewells to Nello, as he
retreated with a bow to Romola and a beck to Tito.  The acute barber saw
that the pretty youngster, who had crept into his liking by some strong
magic, was well launched in Bardo's favourable regard; and satisfied
that his introduction had not miscarried so far, he felt the propriety
of retiring.

The little burst of wrath, called forth by Nello's unlucky quotation,
had diverted Bardo's mind from the feelings which had just before been
hemming in further speech, and he now addressed Tito again with his
ordinary calmness.

"Ah! young man, you are happy in having been able to unite the
advantages of travel with those of study, and you will be welcome among
us as a bringer of fresh tidings from a land which has become sadly
strange to us, except through the agents of a now restricted commerce
and the reports of hasty pilgrims.  For those days are in the far
distance which I myself witnessed, when men like Aurispa and Guarino
went out to Greece as to a storehouse, and came back laden with
manuscripts which every scholar was eager to borrow--and, be it owned
with shame, not always willing to restore; nay, even the days when
erudite Greeks flocked to our shores for a refuge, seem far-off now--
farther off than the on-coming of my blindness.  But doubtless, young
man, research after the treasures of antiquity was not alien to the
purpose of your travels?"

"Assuredly not," said Tito.  "On the contrary, my companion--my father--
was willing to risk his life in his zeal for the discovery of
inscriptions and other traces of ancient civilisation."

"And I trust there is a record of his researches and their results,"
said Bardo, eagerly, "since they must be even more precious than those
of Ciriaco, which I have diligently availed myself of, though they are
not always illuminated by adequate learning."

"There _was_ such a record," said Tito, "but it was lost, like
everything else, in the shipwreck I suffered below Ancona.  The only
record left is such as remains in our--in my memory."

"You must lose no time in committing it to paper, young man," said
Bardo, with growing interest.  "Doubtless you remember much, if you
aided in transcription; for when I was your age, words wrought
themselves into my mind as if they had been fixed by the tool of the
graver; wherefore I constantly marvel at the capriciousness of my
daughter's memory, which grasps certain objects with tenacity, and lets
fall all those minutiae whereon depends accuracy, the very soul of
scholarship.  But I apprehend no such danger with you, young man, if
your will has seconded the advantages of your training."

When Bardo made this reference to his daughter, Tito ventured to turn
his eyes towards her, and at the accusation against her memory his face
broke into its brightest smile, which was reflected as inevitably as
sudden sunbeams in Romola's.  Conceive the soothing delight of that
smile to her!  Romola had never dreamed that there was a scholar in the
world who would smile at a deficiency for which she was constantly made
to feel herself a culprit.  It was like the dawn of a new sense to her--
the sense of comradeship.  They did not look away from each other
immediately, as if the smile had been a stolen one; they looked and
smiled with frank enjoyment.

"She is not really so cold and proud," thought Tito.

"Does _he_ forget too, I wonder?" thought Romola, "Yet I hope not, else
he will vex my father."

But Tito was obliged to turn away, and answer Bardo's question.

"I have had much practice in transcription," he said; "but in the case
of inscriptions copied in memorable scenes, rendered doubly impressive
by the sense of risk and adventure, it may have happened that my
retention of written characters has been weakened.  On the plain of the
Eurotas, or among the gigantic stones of Mycenae and Tyrins--especially
when the fear of the Turk hovers over one like a vulture--the mind
wanders, even though the hand writes faithfully what the eye dictates.
But something doubtless I have retained," added Tito, with a modesty
which was not false, though he was conscious that it was politic,
"something that might be of service if illustrated and corrected by a
wider learning than my own."

"That is well spoken, young man," said Bardo, delighted.  "And I will
not withhold from you such aid as I can give, if you like to communicate
with me concerning your recollections.  I foresee a work which will be a
useful supplement to the `Isolario' of Christoforo Buondelmonte, and
which may take rank with the `Itineraria' of Ciriaco and the admirable
Ambrogio Traversari.  But we must prepare ourselves for calumny, young
man," Bardo went on with energy, as if the work were already growing so
fast that the time of trial was near; "if your book contains novelties
you will be charged with forgery; if my elucidations should clash with
any principles of interpretation adopted by another scholar, our
personal characters will be attacked, we shall be impeached with foul
actions; you must prepare yourself to be told that your mother was a
fish-woman, and that your father was a renegade priest or a hanged
malefactor.  I myself, for having shown error in a single preposition,
had an invective written against me wherein I was taxed with treachery,
fraud, indecency, and even hideous crimes.  Such, my young friend--such
are the flowers with which the glorious path of scholarship is strewed!
But tell me, then: I have learned much concerning Byzantium and
Thessalonica long ago from Demetrio Calcondila, who has but lately
departed from Florence; but you, it seems, have visited less familiar
scenes?"

"Yes; we made what I may call a pilgrimage full of danger, for the sake
of visiting places which have almost died out of the memory of the West,
for they lie away from the track of pilgrims; and my father used to say
that scholars themselves hardly imagine them to have any existence out
of books.  He was of opinion that a new and more glorious era would open
for learning when men should begin to look for their commentaries on the
ancient writers in the remains of cities and temples, nay, in the paths
of the rivers, and on the face of the valleys and the mountains."

"Ah!" said Bardo, fervidly, "your father, then, was not a common man.
Was he fortunate, may I ask?  Had he many friends?"  These last words
were uttered in a tone charged with meaning.

"No; he made enemies--chiefly, I believe, by a certain impetuous
candour; and they hindered his advancement, so that he lived in
obscurity.  And he would never stoop to conciliate: he could never
forget an injury."

"Ah!" said Bardo again, with a long, deep intonation.

"Among our hazardous expeditions," continued Tito, willing to prevent
further questions on a point so personal, "I remember with particular
vividness a hastily snatched visit to Athens.  Our hurry, and the double
danger of being seized as prisoners by the Turks, and of our galley
raising anchor before we could return, made it seem like a fevered
vision of the night--the wide plain, the girdling mountains, the ruined
porticos and columns, either standing far aloof, as if receding from our
hurried footsteps, or else jammed in confusedly among the dwellings of
Christians degraded into servitude, or among the forts and turrets of
their Moslem conquerors, who have their stronghold on the Acropolis."

"You fill me with surprise," said Bardo.  "Athens, then, is not utterly
destroyed and swept away, as I had imagined?"

"No wonder you should be under that mistake, for few even of the Greeks
themselves, who live beyond the mountain boundary of Attica, know
anything about the present condition of Athens, or _Setine_, as the
sailors call it.  I remember, as we were rounding the promontory of
Sunium, the Greek pilot we had on board our Venetian galley pointed to
the mighty columns that stand on the summit of the rock--the remains, as
you know well, of the great temple erected to the goddess Athena, who
looked down from that high shrine with triumph at her conquered rival
Poseidon;--well, our Greek pilot, pointing to those columns, said, `That
was the school of the great philosopher Aristotle.'  And at Athens
itself, the monk who acted as our guide in the hasty view we snatched,
insisted most on showing us the spot where Saint Philip baptised the
Ethiopian eunuch, or some such legend."

"Talk not of monks and their legends, young man!" said Bardo,
interrupting Tito impetuously.  "It is enough to overlay human hope and
enterprise with an eternal frost to think that the ground which was
trodden by philosophers and poets is crawled over by those insect-swarms
of besotted fanatics or howling hypocrites."

"_Perdio_, I have no affection for them," said Tito, with a shrug;
"servitude agrees well with a religion like theirs, which lies in the
renunciation of all that makes life precious to other men.  And they
carry the yoke that befits them: their matin chant is drowned by the
voice of the muezzin, who, from the gallery of the high tower on the
Acropolis, calls every Mussulman to his prayers.  That tower springs
from the Parthenon itself; and every time we paused and directed our
eyes towards it, our guide set up a wail, that a temple which had once
been won from the diabolical uses of the pagans to become the temple of
another virgin than Pallas--the Virgin Mother of God--was now again
perverted to the accursed ends of the Moslem.  It was the sight of those
walls of the Acropolis, which disclosed themselves in the distance as we
leaned over the side of our galley when it was forced by contrary winds
to anchor in the Piraeus, that fired my father's mind with the
determination to see Athens at all risks, and in spite of the sailors'
warnings that if we lingered till a change of wind, they would depart
without us: but, after all, it was impossible for us to venture near the
Acropolis, for the sight of men eager in examining `old stones' raised
the suspicion that we were Venetian spies, and we had to hurry back to
the harbour."

"We will talk more of these things," said Bardo, eagerly.  "You must
recall everything, to the minutest trace left in your memory.  You will
win the gratitude of after-times by leaving a record of the aspect
Greece bore while yet the barbarians had not swept away every trace of
the structures that Pausanias and Pliny described: you will take those
great writers as your models; and such contribution of criticism and
suggestion as my riper mind can supply shall not be wanting to you.
There will be much to tell; for you have travelled, you said, in the
Peloponnesus?"

"Yes; and in Boeotia also: I have rested in the groves of Helicon, and
tasted of the fountain Hippocrene.  But on every memorable spot in
Greece conquest after conquest has set its seal, till there is a
confusion of ownership even in ruins, that only close study and
comparison could unravel.  High over every fastness, from the plains of
Lacedaemon to the straits of Thermopylae, there towers some huge
Frankish fortress, once inhabited by a French or Italian marquis, now
either abandoned or held by Turkish bands."

"Stay!" cried Bardo, whose mind was now too thoroughly preoccupied by
the idea of the future book to attend to Tito's further narration.  "Do
you think of writing in Latin or Greek?  Doubtless Greek is the more
ready clothing for your thoughts, and it is the nobler language.  But,
on the other hand, Latin is the tongue in which we shall measure
ourselves with the larger and more famous number of modern rivals.  And
if you are less at ease in it, I will aid you--yes, I will spend on you
that long-accumulated study which was to have been thrown into the
channel of another work--a work in which I myself was to have had a
helpmate."

Bardo paused a moment, and then added--

"But who knows whether that work may not be executed yet?  For you, too,
young man, have been brought up by a father who poured into your mind
all the long-gathered stream of his knowledge and experience.  Our aid
might be mutual."

Romola, who had watched her father's growing excitement, and divined
well the invisible currents of feeling that determined every question
and remark, felt herself in a glow of strange anxiety: she turned her
eyes on Tito continually, to watch the impression her father's words
made on him, afraid lest he should be inclined to dispel these visions
of co-operation which were lighting up her father's face with a new
hope.  But no!  He looked so bright and gentle: he must feel, as she
did, that in this eagerness of blind age there was piteousness enough to
call forth inexhaustible patience.  How much more strongly he would feel
this if he knew about her brother!  A girl of eighteen imagines the
feelings behind the face that has moved her with its sympathetic youth,
as easily as primitive people imagined the humours of the gods in fair
weather: what is she to believe in, if not in this vision woven from
within?

And Tito was really very far from feeling impatient.  He delighted in
sitting there with the sense that Romola's attention was fixed on him,
and that he could occasionally look at her.  He was pleased that Bardo
should take an interest in him; and he did not dwell with enough
seriousness on the prospect of the work in which he was to be aided, to
feel moved by it to anything else than that easy, good-humoured
acquiescence which was natural to him.

"I shall be proud and happy," he said, in answer to Bardo's last words,
"if my services can be held a meet offering to the matured scholarship
of Messere.  But doubtless,"--here he looked towards Romola--"the lovely
damigella, your daughter, makes all other aid superfluous; for I have
learned from Nello that she has been nourished on the highest studies
from her earliest years."

"You are mistaken," said Romola; "I am by no means sufficient to my
father: I have not the gifts that are necessary for scholarship."

Romola did not make this self-depreciatory statement in a tone of
anxious humility, but with a proud gravity.

"Nay, my Romola," said her father, not willing that the stranger should
have too low a conception of his daughter's powers; "thou art not
destitute of gifts; rather, thou art endowed beyond the measure of
women; but thou hast withal the woman's delicate frame, which ever
craves repose and variety, and so begets a wandering imagination.  My
daughter,"--turning to Tito--"has been very precious to me, filling up
to the best of her power the place of a son.  For I had once a son..."

Bardo checked himself: he did not wish to assume an attitude of
complaint in the presence of a stranger, and he remembered that this
young man, in whom he had unexpectedly become so much interested, was
still a stranger, towards whom it became him rather to keep the position
of a patron.  His pride was roused to double activity by the fear that
he had forgotten his dignity.

"But," he resumed, in his original tone of condescension, "we are
departing from what I believe is to you the most important business.
Nello informed me that you had certain gems which you would fain dispose
of, and that you desired a passport to some man of wealth and taste who
would be likely to become a purchaser."

"It is true; for, though I have obtained employment, as a corrector with
the Cennini, my payment leaves little margin beyond the provision of
necessaries, and would leave less but that my good friend Nello insists
on my hiring a lodging from him, and saying nothing about the rent till
better days."

"Nello is a good-hearted prodigal," said Bardo; "and though, with that
ready ear and ready tongue of his, he is too much like the ill-famed
Margites--knowing many things and knowing them all badly, as I hinted to
him but now--he is nevertheless `abnormis sapiens,' after the manner of
our born Florentines.  But have you the gems with you?  I would
willingly know what they are--yet it is useless: no, it might only
deepen regret.  I cannot add to my store."

"I have one or two intaglios of much beauty," said Tito, proceeding to
draw from his wallet a small case.

But Romola no sooner saw the movement than she looked at him with
significant gravity, and placed her finger on her lips--

  "Con viso che tacendo dicea, Taci."

If Bardo were made aware that the gems were within reach, she knew well
he would want a minute description of them, and it would become pain to
him that they should go away from him, even if he did not insist on some
device for purchasing them in spite of poverty.  But she had no sooner
made this sign than she felt rather guilty and ashamed at having
virtually confessed a weakness of her father's to a stranger.  It seemed
that she was destined to a sudden confidence and familiarity with this
young Greek, strangely at variance with her deep-seated pride and
reserve; and this consciousness again brought the unwonted colour to her
cheeks.

Tito understood her look and sign, and immediately withdrew his hand
from the case, saying, in a careless tone, so as to make it appear that
he was merely following up his last words, "But they are usually in the
keeping of Messer Domenico Cennini, who has strong and safe places for
these things.  He estimates them as worth at least five hundred ducats."

"Ah, then, they are fine intagli," said Bardo.  "Five hundred ducats!
Ah, more than a man's ransom!"

Tito gave a slight, almost imperceptible start, and opened his long dark
eyes with questioning surprise at Bardo's blind face, as if his words--a
mere phrase of common parlance, at a time when men were often being
ransomed from slavery or imprisonment--had had some special meaning for
him.  But the next moment he looked towards Romola, as if her eyes must
be her father's interpreters.  She, intensely preoccupied with what
related to her father, imagined that Tito was looking to her again for
some guidance, and immediately spoke.

"Alessandra Scala delights in gems, you know, father; she calls them her
winter flowers; and the Segretario would be almost sure to buy any gems
that she wished for.  Besides, he himself sets great store by rings and
sigils, which he wears as a defence against pains in the joints."

"It is true," said Bardo.  "Bartolommeo has overmuch confidence in the
efficacy of gems--a confidence wider than what is sanctioned by Pliny,
who clearly shows that he regards many beliefs of that sort as idle
superstitions; though not to the utter denial of medicinal virtues in
gems.  Wherefore, I myself, as you observe, young man, wear certain
rings, which the discreet Camillo Leonardi prescribed to me by letter
when two years ago I had a certain infirmity of sudden numbness.  But
thou hast spoken well, Romola.  I will dictate a letter to Bartolommeo,
which Maso shall carry.  But it were well that Messere should notify to
thee what the gems are, together with the intagli they bear, as a
warrant to Bartolommeo that they will be worthy of his attention."

"Nay, father," said Romola, whose dread lest a paroxysm of the
collector's mania should seize her father, gave her the courage to
resist his proposal.  "Your word will be sufficient that Messere is a
scholar and has travelled much.  The Segretario will need no further
inducement to receive him."

"True, child," said Bardo, touched on a chord that was sure to respond.
"I have no need to add proofs and arguments in confirmation of my word
to Bartolommeo.  And I doubt not that this young man's presence is in
accord with the tones of his voice, so that, the door being once opened,
he will be his own best advocate."

Bardo paused a few moments, but his silence was evidently charged with
some idea that he was hesitating to express, for he once leaned forward
a little as if he were going to speak, then turned his head aside
towards Romola and sank backward again.  At last, as if he had made up
his mind, he said in a tone which might have become a prince giving the
courteous signal of dismissal--

"I am somewhat fatigued this morning, and shall prefer seeing you again
to-morrow, when I shall be able to give you the secretary's answer,
authorising you to present yourself to him at some given time.  But
before you go,"--here the old man, in spite of himself, fell into a more
faltering tone--"you will perhaps permit me to touch your hand?  It is
long since I touched the hand of a young man."

Bardo had stretched out his aged white hand, and Tito immediately placed
his dark but delicate and supple fingers within it.  Bardo's cramped
fingers closed over them, and he held them for a few minutes in silence.
Then he said--

"Romola, has this young man the same complexion as thy brother--fair and
pale?"

"No, father," Romola answered, with determined composure, though her
heart began to beat violently with mingled emotions.  "The hair of
Messere is dark--his complexion is dark."  Inwardly she said, "Will he
mind it? will it be disagreeable?  No, he looks so gentle and
good-natured."  Then aloud again--

"Would Messere permit my father to touch his hair and face?"

Her eyes inevitably made a timid entreating appeal while she asked this,
and Tito's met them with soft brightness as he said, "Assuredly," and,
leaning forward, raised Bardo's hand to his curls, with a readiness of
assent, which was the greater relief to her, because it was
unaccompanied by any sign of embarrassment.

Bardo passed his hand again and again over the long curls and grasped
them a little, as if their spiral resistance made his inward vision
clearer; then he passed his hand over the brow and cheek, tracing the
profile with the edge of his palm and fourth finger, and letting the
breadth of his hand repose on the rich oval of the cheek.

"Ah," he said, as his hand glided from the face and rested on the young
man's shoulder.  "He must be very unlike thy brother, Romola: and it is
the better.  You see no visions, I trust, my young friend?"

At this moment the door opened, and there entered, unannounced, a tall
elderly man in a handsome black silk lucco, who, unwinding his becchetto
from his neck and taking off his cap, disclosed a head as white as
Bardo's.  He cast a keen glance of surprise at the group before him--the
young stranger leaning in that filial attitude, while Bardo's hand
rested on his shoulder, and Romola sitting near with eyes dilated by
anxiety and agitation.  But there was an instantaneous change: Bardo let
fall his hand, Tito raised himself from his stooping posture, and Romola
rose to meet the visitor with an alacrity which implied all the greater
intimacy, because it was unaccompanied by any smile.

"Well, god-daughter," said the stately man, as he touched Romola's
shoulder; "Maso said you had a visitor, but I came in nevertheless."

"It is thou, Bernardo," said Bardo.  "Thou art come at a fortunate
moment.  This, young man," he continued, while Tito rose and bowed, "is
one of the chief citizens of Florence, Messer Bernardo del Nero, my
oldest, I had almost said my only friend--whose good opinion, if you can
win it, may carry you far.  He is but three-and-twenty, Bernardo, yet he
can doubtless tell thee much which thou wilt care to hear; for though a
scholar, he has already travelled far, and looked on other things
besides the manuscripts for which thou hast too light an esteem."

"Ah, a Greek, as I augur," said Bernardo, returning Tito's reverence but
slightly, and surveying him with that sort of glance which seems almost
to cut like fine steel.  "Newly arrived in Florence, it appears.  The
name of Messere--or part of it, for it is doubtless a long one?"

"On the contrary," said Tito, with perfect good-humour, "it is most
modestly free from polysyllabic pomp.  My name is Tito Melema."

"Truly?" said Bernardo, rather scornfully, as he took a seat; "I had
expected it to be at least as long as the names of a city, a river, a
province, and an empire all put together.  We Florentines mostly use
names as we do prawns, and strip them of all flourishes before we trust
them to our throats."

"Well, Bardo," he continued, as if the stranger were not worth further
notice, and changing his tone of sarcastic suspicion for one of sadness,
"we have buried him."

"Ah!" replied Bardo, with corresponding sadness, "and a new epoch has
come for Florence--a dark one, I fear.  Lorenzo has left behind him an
inheritance that is but like the alchemist's laboratory when the wisdom
of the alchemist is gone."

"Not altogether so," said Bernardo.  "Piero de' Medici has abundant
intelligence; his faults are only the faults of hot blood.  I love the
lad--lad he will always be to me, as I have always been `little father'
to him."

"Yet all who want a new order of things are likely to conceive new
hopes," said Bardo.  "We shall have the old strife of parties, I fear."

"If we could have a new order of things that was something else than
knocking down one coat of arms to put up another," said Bernardo, "I
should be ready to say, `I belong to no party: I am a Florentine.'  But
as long as parties are in question, I am a Medicean, and will be a
Medicean till I die.  I am of the same mind as Farinata degli Uberti: if
any man asks me what is meant by siding with a party, I say, as he did,
`To wish ill or well, for the sake of past wrongs or kindnesses.'"

During this short dialogue, Tito had been standing, and now took his
leave.

"But come again at the same hour to-morrow," said Bardo, graciously,
before Tito left the room, "that I may give you Bartolommeo's answer."

"From what quarter of the sky has this pretty Greek youngster alighted
so close to thy chair, Bardo?" said Bernardo del Nero, as the door
closed.  He spoke with dry emphasis, evidently intended to convey
something more to Bardo than was implied by the mere words.

"He is a scholar who has been shipwrecked and has saved a few gems, for
which he wants to find a purchaser.  I am going to send him to
Bartolommeo Scala, for thou knowest it were more prudent in me to
abstain from further purchases."

Bernardo shrugged his shoulders and said, "Romola, wilt thou see if my
servant is without?  I ordered him to wait for me here."  Then, when
Romola was at a sufficient distance, he leaned forward and said to Bardo
in a low, emphatic tone--

"Remember, Bardo, thou hast a rare gem of thy own; take care no one gets
it who is not likely to pay a worthy price.  That pretty Greek has a
lithe sleekness about him, that seems marvellously fitted for slipping
easily into any nest he fixes his mind on."

Bardo was startled: the association of Tito with the image of his lost
son had excluded instead of suggesting the thought of Romola.  But
almost immediately there seemed to be a reaction which made him grasp
the warning as if it had been a hope.

"But why not, Bernardo?  If the young man approved himself worthy--he is
a scholar--and--and there would be no difficulty about the dowry, which
always makes thee gloomy."



CHAPTER SEVEN.

A LEARNED SQUABBLE.

Bartolommeo Scala, secretary of the Florentine Republic, on whom Tito
Melema had been thus led to anchor his hopes, lived in a handsome palace
close to the Porta Pinti, now known as the Casa Gherardesca.  His arms--
an azure ladder transverse on a golden field, with the motto _Gradatim_
placed over the entrance--told all comers that the miller's son held his
ascent to honours by his own efforts a fact to be proclaimed without
wincing.  The secretary was a vain and pompous man, but he was also an
honest one: he was sincerely convinced of his own merit, and could see
no reason for feigning.  The topmost round of his azure ladder had been
reached by this time: he had held his secretaryship these twenty years--
had long since made his orations on the _ringhiera_, or platform of the
Old Palace, as the custom was, in the presence of princely visitors,
while Marzocco, the republican lion, wore his gold crown on the
occasion, and all the people cried, "Viva Messer Bartolommeo!"--had been
on an embassy to Rome, and had there been made titular Senator,
Apostolical Secretary, Knight of the Golden Spur; and had, eight years
ago, been Gonfaloniere--last goal of the Florentine citizen's ambition.
Meantime he had got richer and richer, and more and more gouty, after
the manner of successful mortality; and the Knight of the Golden Spur
had often to sit with helpless cushioned heel under the handsome loggia
he had built for himself, overlooking the spacious gardens and lawn at
the back of his palace.

He was in this position on the day when he had granted the desired
interview to Tito Melema.  The May afternoon sun was on the flowers and
the grass beyond the pleasant shade of the loggia; the too stately silk
lucco was cast aside, and the light loose mantle was thrown over his
tunic; his beautiful daughter Alessandra and her husband, the Greek
soldier-poet Marullo, were seated on one side of him: on the other, two
friends not oppressively illustrious, and therefore the better
listeners.  Yet, to say nothing of the gout, Messer Bartolommeo's
felicity was far from perfect: it was embittered by the contents of
certain papers that lay before him, consisting chiefly of a
correspondence between himself and Politian.  It was a human foible at
that period (incredible as it may seem) to recite quarrels, and favour
scholarly visitors with the communication of an entire and lengthy
correspondence; and this was neither the first nor the second, time that
Scala had asked the candid opinion of his friends as to the balance of
right and wrong in some half-score Latin letters between himself and
Politian, all springing out of certain epigrams written in the most
playful tone in the world.  It was the story of a very typical and
pretty quarrel, in which we are interested, because it supplied
precisely that thistle of hatred necessary, according to Nello, as a
stimulus to the sluggish paces of the cautious steed, Friendship.
Politian, having been a rejected pretender to the love and the hand of
Scala's daughter, kept a very sharp and learned tooth in readiness
against the too prosperous and presumptuous secretary, who had declined
the greatest scholar of the age for a son-in-law.  Scala was a
meritorious public servant, and, moreover, a lucky man--naturally
exasperating to an offended scholar; but then--O beautiful balance of
things!--he had an itch for authorship, and was a bad writer--one of
those excellent people who, sitting in gouty slippers, "penned poetical
trifles" entirely for their own amusement, without any view to an
audience, and, consequently, sent them to their friends in letters,
which were the literary periodicals of the fifteenth century.  Now Scala
had abundance of friends who were ready to praise his writings: friends
like Ficino and Landino--amiable browsers in the Medicean park along
with himself--who found his Latin prose style elegant and masculine; and
the terrible Joseph Scaliger, who was to pronounce him totally ignorant
of Latinity, was at a comfortable distance in the next century.  But
when was the fatal coquetry inherent in superfluous authorship ever
quite contented with the ready praise of friends?  That critical
supercilious Politian--a fellow-browser, who was far from amiable--must
be made aware that the solid secretary showed, in his leisure hours, a
pleasant fertility in verses, which indicated pretty clearly how much he
might do in that way if he were not a man of affairs.

Ineffable moment! when the man you secretly hate sends you a Latin
epigram with a false gender--hendecasyllables with a questionable
elision, at least a toe too much--attempts at poetic figures which are
manifest solecisms.  That moment had come to Politian: the secretary had
put forth his soft head from the official shell, and the terrible
lurking crab was down upon him.  Politian had used the freedom of a
friend, and pleasantly, in the form of a Latin epigram, corrected the
mistake of Scala in making the _culex_ (an insect too well-known on the
banks of the Arno) of the inferior or feminine gender.  Scala replied by
a bad joke, in suitable Latin verses, referring to Politian's
unsuccessful suit.  Better and better.  Politian found the verses very
pretty and highly facetious: the more was the pity that they were
seriously incorrect, and inasmuch as Scala had alleged that he had
written them in imitation of a Greek epigram, Politian, being on such
friendly terms, would enclose a Greek epigram of his own, on the same
interesting insect--not, we may presume, out of any wish to humble
Scala, but rather to instruct him; said epigram containing a lively
conceit about Venus, Cupid, and the _culex_, of a kind much tasted at
that period, founded partly on the zoological fact that the gnat, like
Venus, was born from the waters.  Scala, in reply, begged to say that
his verses were never intended for a scholar with such delicate
olfactories as Politian, nearest of all living men to the perfection of
the ancients, and of a taste so fastidious that sturgeon itself must
seem insipid to him; defended his own verses, nevertheless, though
indeed they were written hastily, without correction, and intended as an
agreeable distraction during the summer heat to himself and such friends
as were satisfied with mediocrity, he, Scala, not being like some other
people, who courted publicity through the booksellers.  For the rest, he
had barely enough Greek to make out the sense of the epigram so
graciously sent him, to say nothing of tasting its elegances; but--the
epigram was Politian's: what more need be said?  Still, by way of
postscript, he feared that his incomparable friend's comparison of the
gnat to Venus, on account of its origin from the waters, was in many
ways ticklish.  On the one hand, Venus might be offended; and on the
other, unless the poet intended an allusion to the doctrine of Thales,
that cold and damp origin seemed doubtful to Scala in the case of a
creature so fond of warmth; a fish were perhaps the better comparison,
or, when the power of flying was in question, an eagle, or indeed, when
the darkness was taken into consideration, a bat or an owl were a less
obscure and more apposite parallel, etcetera, etcetera.  Here was a
great opportunity for Politian.  He was not aware, he wrote, that when
he had Scala's verses placed before him, there was any question of
sturgeon, but rather of frogs and gudgeons: made short work with Scala's
defence of his own Latin, and mangled him terribly on the score of the
stupid criticisms he had ventured on the Greek epigram kindly forwarded
to him as a model.  Wretched cavils, indeed! for as to the damp origin
of the gnat, there was the authority of Virgil himself, who had called
it the "_alumnus_ of the waters;" and as to what his dear dull friend
had to say about the fish, the eagle, and the rest, it was "nihil ad
rem;" for because the eagle could fly higher, it by no means followed
that the gnat could not fly at all, etcetera, etcetera.  He was ashamed,
however, to dwell on such trivialities, and thus to swell a gnat into an
elephant; but, for his own part, would only add that he had nothing
deceitful or double about him, neither was he to be caught when present
by the false blandishments of those who slandered him in his absence,
agreeing rather with a Homeric sentiment on that head--which furnished a
Greek quotation to serve as powder to his bullet.

The quarrel could not end there.  The logic could hardly get worse, but
the secretary got more pompously self-asserting, and the scholarly
poet's temper more and more venomous.  Politian had been generously
willing to hold up a mirror, by which the too-inflated secretary,
beholding his own likeness, might be induced to cease setting up his
ignorant defences of bad Latin against ancient authorities whom the
consent of centuries had placed beyond question,--unless, indeed, he had
designed to sink in literature in proportion as he rose in honours, that
by a sort of compensation men of letters might feel themselves his
equals.  In return, Politian was begged to examine Scala's writings:
nowhere would he find a more devout admiration of antiquity.  The
secretary was ashamed of the age in which he lived, and blushed for it.
_Some_, indeed, there were who wanted to have their own works praised
and exalted to a level with the divine monuments of antiquity; but he,
Scala, could not oblige them.  And as to the honours which were
offensive to the envious, they had been well earned: witness his whole
life since he came in penury to Florence.  The elegant scholar, in
reply, was not surprised that Scala found the Age distasteful to him,
since he himself was so distasteful to the Age; nay, it was with perfect
accuracy that he, the elegant scholar, had called Scala a branny
monster, inasmuch as he was formed from the off-scourings of monsters,
born amidst the refuse of a mill, and eminently worthy the long-eared
office of turning the paternal millstones (_in pistrini sordibus natus
et quidem pistrino dignissimus_)!

It was not without reference to Tito's appointed visit that the papers
containing this correspondence were brought out to-day.  Here was a new
Greek scholar whose accomplishments were to be tested, and on nothing
did Scala more desire a dispassionate opinion from persons of superior
knowledge than on that Greek epigram of Politian's.  After sufficient
introductory talk concerning Tito's travels, after a survey and
discussion of the gems, and an easy passage from the mention of the
lamented Lorenzo's eagerness in collecting such specimens of ancient art
to the subject of classical tastes and studies in general and their
present condition in Florence, it was inevitable to mention Politian, a
man of eminent ability indeed, but a little too arrogant--assuming to be
a Hercules, whose office it was to destroy all the literary
monstrosities of the age, and writing letters to his elders without
signing them, as if they were miraculous revelations that could only
have one source.  And after all, were not his own criticisms often
questionable and his tastes perverse?  He was fond of saying pungent
things about the men who thought they wrote like Cicero because they
ended every sentence with "esse videtur:" but while he was boasting of
his freedom from servile imitation, did he not fall into the other
extreme, running after strange words and affected phrases?  Even in his
much-belauded `Miscellanea' was every point tenable?  And Tito, who had
just been looking into the `Miscellanea,' found so much to say that was
agreeable to the secretary--he would have done so from the mere
disposition to please, without further motive--that he showed himself
quite worthy to be made a judge in the notable correspondence concerning
the _culex_.  Here was the Greek epigram which Politian had doubtless
thought the finest in the world, though he had pretended to believe that
the "transmarini," the Greeks themselves, would make light of it: had he
not been unintentionally speaking the truth in his false modesty?

Tito was ready, and scarified the epigram to Scala's content.  O wise
young judge!  He could doubtless appreciate satire even in the vulgar
tongue, and Scala--who, excellent man, not seeking publicity through the
booksellers, was never unprovided with "hasty uncorrected trifles," as a
sort of sherbet for a visitor on a hot day, or, if the weather were
cold, why then as a cordial--had a few little matters in the shape of
Sonnets, turning on well-known foibles of Politian's, which he would not
like to go any farther, but which would, perhaps, amuse the company.

Enough: Tito took his leave under an urgent invitation to come again.
His gems were interesting; especially the agate, with the _lusus
naturae_ in it--a most wonderful semblance of Cupid riding on the lion;
and the "Jew's stone," with the lion-headed serpent enchased in it; both
of which the secretary agreed to buy--the latter as a reinforcement of
his preventives against the gout, which gave him such severe twinges
that it was plain enough how intolerable it would be if he were not well
supplied with rings of rare virtue, and with an amulet worn close under
the right breast.  But Tito was assured that he himself was more
interesting than his gems.  He had won his way to the Scala Palace by
the recommendation of Bardo de' Bardi, who, to be sure, was Scala's old
acquaintance and a worthy scholar, in spite of his overvaluing himself a
little (a frequent foible in the secretary's friends); but he must come
again on the ground of his own manifest accomplishments.

The interview could hardly have ended more auspiciously for Tito, and as
he walked out at the Porta Pinti that he might laugh a little at his
ease over the affair of the _culex_, he felt that fortune could hardly
mean to turn her back on him again at present, since she had taken him
by the hand in this decided way.



CHAPTER EIGHT.

A FACE IN THE CROWD.

It is easy to northern people to rise early on Midsummer morning, to see
the dew on the grassy edge of the dusty pathway, to notice the fresh
shoots among the darker green of the oak and fir in the coppice, and to
look over the gate at the shorn meadow, without recollecting that it is
the Nativity of Saint John the Baptist.

Not so to the Florentine--still less to the Florentine of the fifteenth
century: to him on that particular morning the brightness of the eastern
sun on the Arno had something special in it; the ringing of the bells
was articulate, and declared it to be the great summer festival of
Florence, the day of San Giovanni.

San Giovanni had been the patron saint of Florence for at least eight
hundred years--ever since the time when the Lombard Queen Theodolinda
had commanded her subjects to do him peculiar honour; nay, says old
Villani, to the best of his knowledge, ever since the days of
Constantino the Great and Pope Sylvester, when the Florentines deposed
their idol Mars, whom they were nevertheless careful not to treat with
contumely; for while they consecrated their beautiful and noble temple
to the honour of God and of the "Beato Messere Santo Giovanni," they
placed old Mars respectfully on a high tower near the River Arno,
finding in certain ancient memorials that he had been elected as their
tutelar deity under such astral influences that if he were broken, or
otherwise treated with indignity, the city would suffer great damage and
mutation.  But in the fifteenth century that discreet regard to the
feelings of the Man-destroyer had long vanished: the god of the spear
and shield had ceased to frown by the side of the Arno, and the defences
of the Republic were held to lie in its craft and its coffers.  For
spear and shield could be hired by gold florins, and on the gold florins
there had always been the image of San Giovanni.

Much good had come to Florence since the dim time of struggle between
the old patron and the new: some quarrelling and bloodshed, doubtless,
between Guelf and Ghibelline, between Black and White, between orthodox
sons of the Church and heretic Paterini; some floods, famine, and
pestilence; but still much wealth and glory.  Florence had achieved
conquests over walled cities once mightier than itself, and especially
over hated Pisa, whose marble buildings were too high and beautiful,
whose masts were too much honoured on Greek and Italian coasts.  The
name of Florence had been growing prouder and prouder in all the courts
of Europe, nay, in Africa itself, on the strength of purest gold
coinage, finest dyes and textures, pre-eminent scholarship and poetic
genius, and wits of the most serviceable sort for statesmanship and
banking: it was a name so omnipresent that a Pope with a turn for
epigram had called Florentines "the fifth element."  And for this high
destiny, though it might partly depend on the stars and Madonna dell'
Impruneta, and certainly depended on other higher Powers less often
named, the praise was greatly due to San Giovanni, whose image was on
the fair gold florins.

Therefore it was fitting that the day of San Giovanni--that ancient
Church festival already venerable in the days of Saint Augustine--should
be a day of peculiar rejoicing to Florence, and should be ushered in by
a vigil duly kept in strict old Florentine fashion, with much dancing,
with much street jesting, and perhaps with not a little stone-throwing
and window-breaking, but emphatically with certain street sights such as
could only be provided by a city which held in its service a clever
Cecca, engineer and architect, valuable alike in sieges and in shows.
By the help of Cecca, the very saints, surrounded with their
almond-shaped glory, and floating on clouds with their joyous
companionship of winged cherubs, even as they may be seen to this day in
the pictures of Perugino, seemed, on the eve of San Giovanni, to have
brought their piece of the heavens down into the narrow streets, and to
pass slowly through them; and, more wonderful still, saints of gigantic
size, with attendant angels, might be seen, not seated, but moving in a
slow mysterious manner along the streets, like a procession of colossal
figures come down from the high domes and tribunes of the churches.  The
clouds were made of good woven stuff, the saints and cherubs were
unglorified mortals supported by firm bars, and those mysterious giants
were really men of very steady brain, balancing themselves on stilts,
and enlarged, like Greek tragedians, by huge masks and stuffed
shoulders; but he was a miserably unimaginative Florentine who thought
only of that--nay, somewhat impious, for in the images of sacred things
was there not some of the virtue of sacred things themselves?  And if,
after that, there came a company of merry black demons well armed with
claws and thongs, and other implements of sport, ready to perform
impromptu farces of bastinadoing and clothes-tearing, why, that was the
demons' way of keeping a vigil, and they, too, might have descended from
the domes and the tribunes.  The Tuscan mind slipped from the devout to
the burlesque, as readily as water round an angle; and the saints had
already had their turn, had gone their way, and made their due pause
before the gates of San Giovanni, to do him honour on the eve of his
_festa_.  And on the morrow, the great day thus ushered in, it was
fitting that the tributary symbols paid to Florence by all its dependent
cities, districts, and villages, whether conquered, protected, or of
immemorial possession, should be offered at the shrine of San Giovanni
in the old octagonal church, once the cathedral and now the baptistery,
where every Florentine had had the sign of the Cross made with the
anointing chrism on his brow; that all the city, from the white-haired
man to the stripling, and from the matron to the lisping child, should
be clothed in its best to do honour to the great day, and see the great
sight; and that again, when the sun was sloping and the streets were
cool, there should be the glorious race or Corso, when the unsaddled
horses, clothed in rich trappings, should ran right across the city,
from the Porta al Prato on the north-west, through the Mercato Vecchio,
to the Porta Santa Croce on the south-east, where the richest of
_Palii_, or velvet and brocade banners with silk linings and fringe of
gold, such as became a city that half-clothed the well-dressed world,
were mounted on a triumphal car awaiting the winner or winner's owner.

And thereafter followed more dancing; nay, through the whole day, says
an old chronicler at the beginning of that century, there were weddings
and the grandest gatherings, with so much piping, music and song, with
balls and feasts and gladness and ornament, that this earth might have
been mistaken for Paradise!

In this year of 1492, it was, perhaps, a little less easy to make that
mistake.  Lorenzo the magnificent and subtle was dead, and an arrogant,
incautious Piero was come in his room, an evil change for Florence,
unless, indeed, the wise horse prefers the bad rider, as more easily
thrown from the saddle, and already the regrets for Lorenzo were getting
less predominant over the murmured desire for government on a broader
basis, in which corruption might be arrested, and there might be that
free play for everybody's jealousy and ambition, which made the ideal
liberty of the good old quarrelsome, struggling times, when Florence
raised her great buildings, reared her own soldiers, drove out would-be
tyrants at the sword's point, and was proud to keep faith at her own
loss.  Lorenzo was dead, Pope Innocent was dying, and a troublesome
Neapolitan succession, with an intriguing, ambitious Milan, might set
Italy by the ears before long: the times were likely to be difficult.
Still, there was all the more reason that the Republic should keep its
religious festivals.

And Midsummer morning, in this year 1492, was not less bright than
usual.  It was betimes in the morning that the symbolic offerings to be
carried in grand procession were all assembled at their starting-point
in the Piazza della Signoria--that famous piazza, where stood then, and
stand now, the massive turreted Palace of the People, called the Palazzo
Vecchio, and the spacious Loggia, built by Orcagna--the scene of all
grand State ceremonial.  The sky made the fairest blue tent, and under
it the bells swung so vigorously that every evil spirit with sense
enough to be formidable, must long since have taken his flight; windows
and terraced roofs were alive with human faces; sombre stone houses were
bright with hanging draperies; the boldly soaring palace tower, the yet
older square tower of the Bargello, and the spire of the neighbouring
Badia, seemed to keep watch above; and below, on the broad polygonal
flags of the piazza, was the glorious show of banners, and horses with
rich trappings, and gigantic _ceri_, or tapers, that were fitly called
towers--strangely aggrandised descendants of those torches by whose
faint light the Church worshipped in the Catacombs.  Betimes in the
morning all processions had need to move under the Midsummer sky of
Florence, where the shelter of the narrow streets must every now and
then be exchanged for the glare of wide spaces; and the sun would be
high up in the heavens before the long pomp had ended its pilgrimage in
the Piazza di San Giovanni.

But here, where the procession was to pause, the magnificent city, with
its ingenious Cecca, had provided another tent than the sky; for the
whole of the Piazza del Duomo, from the octagonal baptistery in the
centre to the facade of the cathedral and the walls of the houses on the
other sides of the quadrangle, was covered, at the height of forty feet
or more, with blue drapery, adorned with well-stitched yellow lilies and
the familiar coats of arms, while sheaves of many-coloured banners
drooped at fit angles under this superincumbent blue--a gorgeous
rainbow-lit shelter to the waiting spectators who leaned from the
windows, and made a narrow border on the pavement, and wished for the
coming of the show.

One of these spectators was Tito Melema.  Bright, in the midst of
brightness, he sat at the window of the room above Nello's shop, his
right elbow resting on the red drapery hanging from the window-sill, and
his head supported in a backward position by the right-hand, which
pressed the curls against his ear.  His face wore that bland liveliness,
as far removed from excitability as from heaviness or gloom, which marks
the companion popular alike amongst men and women--the companion who is
never obtrusive or noisy from uneasy vanity or excessive animal spirits,
and whose brow is never contracted by resentment or indignation.  He
showed no other change from the two months and more that had passed
since his first appearance in the weather-stained tunic and hose, than
that added radiance of good fortune, which is like the just perceptible
perfecting of a flower after it has drunk a morning's sunbeams.  Close
behind him, ensconced in the narrow angle between his chair and the
window-frame, stood the slim figure of Nello in holiday suit, and at his
left the younger Cennini--Pietro, the erudite corrector of proof-sheets,
not Domenico the practical.  Tito was looking alternately down on the
scene below, and upward at the varied knot of gazers and talkers
immediately around him, some of whom had come in after witnessing the
commencement of the procession in the Piazza della Signoria.  Piero di
Cosimo was raising a laugh among them by his grimaces and anathemas at
the noise of the bells, against which no kind of ear-stuffing was a
sufficient barricade, since the more he stuffed his ears the more he
felt the vibration of his skull; and declaring that he would bury
himself in the most solitary spot of the Valdarno on a _festa_, if he
were not condemned, as a painter, to lie in wait for the secrets of
colour that were sometimes to be caught from the floating of banners and
the chance grouping of the multitude.

Tito had just turned his laughing face away from the whimsical painter
to look down at the small drama going on among the checkered border of
spectators, when at the angle of the marble steps in front of the Duomo,
nearly opposite Nello's shop, he saw a man's face upturned towards him,
and fixing on him a gaze that seemed to have more meaning in it than the
ordinary passing observation of a stranger.  It was a face with tonsured
head, that rose above the black mantle and white tunic of a Dominican
friar--a very common sight in Florence; but the glance had something
peculiar in it for Tito.  There was a faint suggestion in it, certainly
not of an unpleasant kind.  Yet what pleasant association had he ever
had with monks?  None.  The glance and the suggestion hardly took longer
than a flash of lightning.

"Nello!" said Tito, hastily, but immediately added, in a tone of
disappointment, "Ah, he has turned round.  It was that tall, thin friar
who is going up the steps.  I wanted you to tell me if you knew aught of
him?"

"One of the Frati Predicatori," said Nello, carelessly; "you don't
expect me to know the private history of the crows."

"I seem to remember something about his face," said Tito.  "It is an
uncommon face."

"What? you thought it might be our Fra Girolamo?  Too tall; and he never
shows himself in that chance way."

"Besides, that loud-barking `hound of the Lord' [Note 1] is not in
Florence just now," said Francesco Cei, the popular poet; "he has taken
Piero de' Medici's hint, to carry his railing prophecies on a journey
for a while."

"The Frate neither rails nor prophesies against any man," said a
middle-aged personage seated at the other corner of the window; "he only
prophesies against vice.  If you think that an attack on your poems,
Francesco, it is not the Frate's fault."

"Ah, he's gone into the Duomo now," said Tito, who had watched the
figure eagerly.  "No, I was not under that mistake, Nello.  Your Fra
Girolamo has a high nose and a large under-lip.  I saw him once--he is
not handsome; but this man..."

"Truce to your descriptions!" said Cennini.  "Hark! see!  Here come the
horsemen and the banners.  That standard," he continued, laying his hand
familiarly on Tito's shoulder,--"that carried on the horse with white
trappings--that with the red eagle holding the green dragon between his
talons, and the red lily over the eagle--is the Gonfalon of the Guelf
party, and those cavaliers close round it are the chief officers of the
Guelf party.  That is one of our proudest banners, grumble as we may; it
means the triumph of the Guelfs, which means the triumph of Florentine
will, which means triumph of the popolani."

"Nay, go on, Cennini," said the middle-aged man, seated at the window,
"which means triumph of the fat popolani over the lean, which again
means triumph of the fattest popolano over those who are less fat."

"Cronaca, you are becoming sententious," said the printer; "Fra
Girolamo's preaching will spoil you, and make you take life by the wrong
handle.  Trust me, your cornices will lose half their beauty if you
begin to mingle bitterness with them; that is the _maniera Tedesca_
which you used to declaim against when you came from Rome.  The next
palace you build we shall see you trying to put the Frate's doctrine
into stone."

"That is a goodly show of cavaliers," said Tito, who had learned by this
time the best way to please Florentines; "but are there not strangers
among them?  I see foreign costumes."

"Assuredly," said Cennini; "you see there the Orators from France,
Milan, and Venice, and behind them are English and German nobles; for it
is customary that all foreign visitors of distinction pay their tribute
to San Giovanni in the train of that gonfalon.  For my part, I think our
Florentine cavaliers sit their horses as well as any of those
cut-and-thrust northerners, whose wits lie in their heels and saddles;
and for yon Venetian, I fancy he would feel himself more at ease on the
back of a dolphin.  We ought to know something of horsemanship, for we
excel all Italy in the sports of the Giostra, and the money we spend on
them.  But you will see a finer show of our chief men by-and-by, Melema;
my brother himself will be among the officers of the Zecca."

"The banners are the better sight," said Piero di Cosimo, forgetting the
noise in his delight at the winding stream of colour as the tributary
standards advanced round the piazza.  "The Florentine men are so-so;
they make but a sorry show at this distance with their patch of sallow
flesh-tint above the black garments; but those banners with their
velvet, and satin, and minever, and brocade, and their endless play of
delicate light and shadow!--_Va_! your human talk and doings are a tame
jest; the only passionate life is in form and colour."

"Ay, Piero, if Satanasso could paint, thou wouldst sell thy soul to
learn his secrets," said Nello.  "But there is little likelihood of it,
seeing the blessed angels themselves are such poor hands at chiaroscuro,
if one may judge from their _capo-d'opera_, the Madonna Nunziata."

"There go the banners of Pisa and Arezzo," said Cennini.  "Ay, Messer
Pisano, it is no use for you to look sullen; you may as well carry your
banner to our San Giovanni with a good grace.  `Pisans false,
Florentines blind'--the second half of that proverb will hold no longer.
There come the ensigns of our subject towns and signories, Melema; they
will all be suspended in San Giovanni until this day next year, when
they will give place to new ones."

"They are a fair sight," said Tito; "and San Giovanni will surely be as
well satisfied with that produce of Italian looms as Minerva with her
peplos, especially as he contents himself with so little drapery.  But
my eyes are less delighted with those whirling towers, which would soon
make me fall from the window in sympathetic vertigo."

The "towers" of which Tito spoke were a part of the procession esteemed
very glorious by the Florentine populace; and being perhaps chiefly a
kind of hyperbole for the all-efficacious wax taper, were also called
_ceri_.  But inasmuch as hyperbole is impracticable in a real and
literal fashion, these gigantic _ceri_, some of them so large as to be
of necessity carried on wheels, were not solid but hollow, and had their
surface made not solely of wax, but of wood and pasteboard, gilded,
carved, and painted, as real sacred tapers often are, with successive
circles of figures--warriors on horseback, foot-soldiers with lance and
shield, dancing maidens, animals, trees and fruits, and in fine, says
the old chronicler, "all things that could delight the eye and the
heart;" the hollowness having the further advantage that men could stand
inside these hyperbolic tapers and whirl them continually, so as to
produce a phantasmagoric effect, which, considering the towers were
numerous, must have been calculated to produce dizziness on a truly
magnificent scale.

"_Pestilenza_!" said Piero di Cosimo, moving from the window, "those
whirling circles one above the other are worse than the jangling of all
the bells.  Let me know when the last taper has passed."

"Nay, you will surely like to be called when the contadini come carrying
their torches," said Nello; "you would not miss the country-folk of the
Mugello and the Casentino, of whom your favourite Leonardo would make a
hundred grotesque sketches."

"No," said Piero, resolutely, "I will see nothing till the car of the
Zecca comes.  I have seen clowns enough holding tapers aslant, both with
and without cowls, to last me for my life."

"Here it comes, then, Piero--the car of the Zecca," called out Nello,
after an interval during which towers and tapers in a descending scale
of size had been making their slow transit.

"_Fediddio_!" exclaimed Francesco Cei, "that is a well-tanned San
Giovanni! some sturdy Romagnole beggar-man, I'll warrant.  Our Signoria
plays the host to all the Jewish and Christian scum that every other
city shuts its gates against, and lets them fatten on us like Saint
Anthony's swine."

The car of the Zecca or Mint, which had just rolled into sight, was
originally an immense wooden tower or _cero_ adorned after the same
fashion as the other tributary _ceri_, mounted on a splendid car, and
drawn by two mouse-coloured oxen, whose mild heads looked out from rich
trappings bearing the arms of the Zecca.  But the latter half of the
century was getting rather ashamed of the towers with their circular or
spiral paintings, which had delighted the eyes and the hearts of the
other half, so that they had become a contemptuous proverb, and any
ill-painted figure looking, as will sometimes happen to figures in the
best ages of art, as if it had been boned for a pie, was called a
_fantoccio da cero_, a tower-puppet; consequently improved taste, with
Cecca to help it, had devised for the magnificent Zecca a triumphal car
like a pyramidal catafalque, with ingenious wheels warranted to turn all
corners easily.  Round the base were living figures of saints and angels
arrayed in sculpturesque fashion; and on the summit, at the height of
thirty feet, well bound to an iron rod and holding an iron cross also
firmly infixed, stood a living representative of Saint John the Baptist,
with arms and legs bare, a garment of tiger-skins about his body, and a
golden nimbus fastened on his head--as the Precursor was wont to appear
in the cloisters and churches, not having yet revealed himself to
painters as the brown and sturdy boy who made one of the Holy Family.
For where could the image of the patron saint be more fitly placed than
on the symbol of the Zecca?  Was not the royal prerogative of coining
money the surest token that a city had won its independence? and by the
blessing of San Giovanni this "beautiful sheepfold" of his had shown
that token earliest among the Italian cities.  Nevertheless, the annual
function of representing the patron saint was not among the high prizes
of public life; it was paid for with something like ten shillings, a
cake weighing fourteen pounds, two bottles of wine, and a handsome
supply of light eatables; the money being furnished by the magnificent
Zecca, and the payment in kind being by peculiar "privilege" presented
in a basket suspended on a pole from an upper window of a private house,
whereupon the eidolon of the austere saint at once invigorated himself
with a reasonable share of the sweets and wine, threw the remnants to
the crowd, and embraced the mighty cake securely with his right arm
through the remainder of his passage.  This was the attitude in which
the mimic San Giovanni presented himself as the tall car jerked and
vibrated on its slow way round the piazza to the northern gate of the
Baptistery.

"There go the Masters of the Zecca, and there is my brother--you see
him, Melema?" cried Cennini, with an agreeable stirring of pride at
showing a stranger what was too familiar to be remarkable to
fellow-citizens.  "Behind come the members of the Corporation of
Calimara, [Note 2] the dealers in foreign cloth, to which we have given
our Florentine finish; men of ripe years, you see, who were matriculated
before you were born; and then comes the famous Art of Money-changers."

"Many of them matriculated also to the noble art of usury before you
were born," interrupted Francesco Cei, "as you may discern by a certain
fitful glare of the eye and sharp curve of the nose which manifest their
descent from the ancient Harpies, whose portraits you saw supporting the
arms of the Zecca.  Shaking off old prejudices now, such a procession as
that of some four hundred passably ugly men carrying their tapers in
open daylight, Diogenes-fashion, as if they were looking for a lost
quattrino, would make a merry spectacle for the Feast of Fools."

"Blaspheme not against the usages of our city," said Pietro Cennini,
much offended.  "There are new wits who think they see things more truly
because they stand on their heads to look at them, like tumblers and
mountebanks, instead of keeping the attitude of rational men.  Doubtless
it makes little difference to Maestro Vaiano's monkeys whether they see
our Donatello's statue of Judith with their heads or their tails
uppermost."

"Your solemnity will allow some quarter to playful fancy, I hope," said
Cei, with a shrug, "else what becomes of the ancients, whose example you
scholars are bound to revere, Messer Pietro?  Life was never anything
but a perpetual see-saw between gravity and jest."

"Keep your jest then till your end of the pole is uppermost," said
Cennini, still angry, "and that is not when the great bond of our
Republic is expressing itself in ancient symbols, without which the
vulgar would be conscious of nothing beyond their own petty wants of
back and stomach, and never rise to the sense of community in religion
and law.  There has been no great people without processions, and the
man who thinks himself too wise to be moved by them to anything but
contempt, is like the puddle that was proud of standing alone while the
river rushed by."

No one said anything after this indignant burst of Cennini's till he
himself spoke again.

"Hark! the trumpets of the Signoria: now comes the last stage of the
show, Melema.  That is our Gonfaloniere in the middle, in the starred
mantle, with the sword carried before him.  Twenty years ago we used to
see our foreign Podesta, who was our judge in civil causes, walking on
his right-hand; but our Republic has been over-doctored by clever
_Medici_.  That is the Proposto [Spokesman or Moderator] of the Priori
on the left; then come the other seven Priori; then all the other
magistracies and officials of our Republic.  You see your patron the
Segretario?"

"There is Messer Bernardo del Nero also," said Tito; "his visage is a
fine and venerable one, though it has worn rather a petrifying look
towards me."

"Ah," said Nello, "he is the dragon that guards the remnant of old
Bardo's gold, which, I fancy, is chiefly that virgin gold that falls
about the fair Romola's head and shoulders; eh, my Apollino?" he added,
patting Tito's head.

Tito had the youthful grace of blushing, but he had also the adroit and
ready speech that prevents a blush from looking like embarrassment.  He
replied at once--

"And a very Pactolus it is--a stream with golden ripples.  If I were an
alchemist--"

He was saved from the need for further speech by the sudden fortissimo
of drums and trumpets and fifes, bursting into the breadth of the piazza
in a grand storm of sound--a roar, a blast, and a whistling, well
befitting a city famous for its musical instruments, and reducing the
members of the closest group to a state of deaf isolation.

During this interval Nello observed Tito's fingers moving in recognition
of some one in the crowd below, but not seeing the direction of his
glance he failed to detect the object of this greeting--the sweet round
blue-eyed face under a white hood--immediately lost in the narrow border
of heads, where there was a continual eclipse of round contadina cheeks
by the harsh-lined features or bent shoulders of an old spadesman, and
where profiles turned as sharply from north to south as weathercocks
under a shifting wind.

But when it was felt that the show was ended--when the twelve prisoners
released in honour of the day, and the very _barberi_ or race-horses,
with the arms of their owners embroidered on their cloths, had followed
up the Signoria, and been duly consecrated to San Giovanni, and every
one was moving from the window--Nello, whose Florentine curiosity was of
that lively canine sort which thinks no trifle too despicable for
investigation, put his hand on Tito's shoulder and said--

"What acquaintance was that you were making signals to, eh, _giovane
mio_?"

"Some little contadina who probably mistook me for an acquaintance, for
she had honoured me with a greeting."

"Or who wished to begin an acquaintance," said Nello.  "But you are
bound for the Via de' Bardi and the feast of the Muses: there is no
counting on you for a frolic, else we might have gone in search of
adventures together in the crowd, and had some pleasant fooling in
honour of San Giovanni.  But your high fortune has come on you too soon:
I don't mean the professor's mantle--_that_ is roomy enough to hide a
few stolen chickens, but--Messer Endymion minded his manners after that
singular good fortune of his; and what says our Luigi Pulci?

  "`Da quel giorno in qua ch'amor m'accese
  Per lei son fatto e gentile e cortese.'"

"Nello, _amico mio_, thou hast an intolerable trick of making life stale
by forestalling it with thy talk," said Tito, shrugging his shoulders,
with a look of patient resignation, which was his nearest approach to
anger: "not to mention that such ill-founded babbling would be held a
great offence by that same goddess whose humble worshipper you are
always professing yourself."

"I will be mute," said Nello, laying his finger on his lips, with a
responding shrug.  "But it is only under our four eyes that I talk any
folly about her."

"Pardon! you were on the verge of it just now in the hearing of others.
If you want to ruin me in the minds of Bardo and his daughter--"

"Enough, enough!" said Nello.  "I am an absurd old barber.  It all comes
from that abstinence of mine, in not making bad verses in my youth: for
want of letting my folly run out that way when I was eighteen, it runs
out at my tongue's end now I am at the unseemly age of fifty.  But Nello
has not got his head muffled for all that; he can see a buffalo in the
snow.  _Addio, giovane mio_."

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Note 1.  A play on the name of the Dominicans (_Domini Canes_) which was
accepted by themselves, and which is pictorially represented in a fresco
painted for them by Simone Memmi.

Note 2.  "Arte di Calimara", "arte" being, in this use of it, equivalent
to corporation.



CHAPTER NINE.

A MAN'S RANSOM.

Tito was soon down among the crowd, and, notwithstanding his indifferent
reply to Nello's question about his chance acquaintance, he was not
without a passing wish, as he made his way round the piazza to the Corso
degli Adimari, that he might encounter the pair of blue eyes which had
looked up towards him from under the square bit of white linen drapery
that formed the ordinary hood of the contadina at festa time.  He was
perfectly well aware that that face was Tessa's; but he had not chosen
to say so.  What had Nello to do with the matter?  Tito had an innate
love of reticence--let us say a talent for it--which acted as other
impulses do, without any conscious motive, and, like all people to whom
concealment is easy, he would now and then conceal something which had
as little the nature of a secret as the fact that he had seen a flight
of crows.

But the passing wish about pretty Tessa was almost immediately eclipsed
by the recurrent recollection of that friar whose face had some
irrecoverable association for him.  Why should a sickly fanatic, worn
with fasting, have looked at _him_ in particular, and where in all his
travels could he remember encountering that face before?  Folly! such
vague memories hang about the mind like cobwebs, with tickling
importunity--best to sweep them away at a dash: and Tito had pleasanter
occupation for his thoughts.  By the time he was turning out of the
Corso degli Adimari into a side-street he was caring only that the sun
was high, and that the procession had kept him longer than he had
intended from his visit to that room in the Via de' Bardi, where his
coming, he knew, was anxiously awaited.  He felt the scene of his
entrance beforehand: the joy beaming diffusedly in the blind face like
the light in a semi-transparent lamp; the transient pink flush on
Romola's face and neck, which subtracted nothing from her majesty, but
only gave it the exquisite charm of womanly sensitiveness, heightened
still more by what seemed the paradoxical boy-like frankness of her look
and smile.  They were the best comrades in the world during the hours
they passed together round the blind man's chair: she was constantly
appealing to Tito, and he was informing her, yet he felt himself
strangely in subjection to Romola with that simplicity of hers: he felt
for the first time, without defining it to himself, that loving awe in
the presence of noble womanhood, which is perhaps something like the
worship paid of old to a great nature-goddess, who was not all-knowing,
but whose life and power were something deeper and more primordial than
knowledge.  They had never been alone together, and he could frame to
himself no probable image of love-scenes between them: he could only
fancy and wish wildly--what he knew was impossible--that Romola would
some day tell him that she loved him.  One day in Greece, as he was
leaning over a wall in the sunshine, a little black-eyed peasant girl,
who had rested her water-pot on the wall, crept gradually nearer and
nearer to him, and at last shyly asked him to kiss her, putting up her
round olive cheek very innocently.  Tito was used to love that came in
this unsought fashion.  But Romola's love would never come in that way:
would it ever come at all?--and yet it was that topmost apple on which
he had set his mind.  He was in his fresh youth--not passionate, but
impressible: it was as inevitable that he should feel lovingly towards
Romola as that the white irises should be reflected in the clear sunlit
stream; but he had no coxcombry, and he had an intimate sense that
Romola was something very much above him.  Many men have felt the same
before a large-eyed, simple child.

Nevertheless, Tito had had the rapid success which would have made some
men presuming, or would have warranted him in thinking that there would
be no great presumption in entertaining an agreeable confidence that he
might one day be the husband of Romola--nay, that her father himself was
not without a vision of such a future for him.  His first auspicious
interview with Bartolommeo Scala had proved the commencement of a
growing favour on the secretary's part, and had led to an issue which
would have been enough to make Tito decide on Florence as the place in
which to establish himself, even if it had held no other magnet.
Politian was professor of Greek as well as Latin at Florence,
professorial chairs being maintained there, although the university had
been removed to Pisa; but for a long time Demetrio Calcondila, one of
the most eminent and respectable among the emigrant Greeks, had also
held a Greek chair, simultaneously with the too predominant Italian.
Calcondila was now gone to Milan, and there was no counterpoise or rival
to Politian such as was desired for him by the friends who wished him to
be taught a little propriety and humility.  Scala was far from being the
only friend of this class, and he found several who, if they were not
among those thirsty admirers of mediocrity that were glad to be
refreshed with his verses in hot weather, were yet quite willing to join
him in doing that moral service to Politian.  It was finally agreed that
Tito should be supported in a Greek chair, as Demetrio Calcondila had
been by Lorenzo himself, who, being at the same time the affectionate
patron of Politian, had shown by precedent that there was nothing
invidious in such a measure, but only a zeal for true learning and for
the instruction of the Florentine youth.

Tito was thus sailing under the fairest breeze, and besides convincing
fair judges that his talents squared with his good fortune, he wore that
fortune so easily and unpretentiously that no one had yet been offended
by it.  He was not unlikely to get into the best Florentine society:
society where there was much more plate than the circle of enamelled
silver in the centre of the brass dishes, and where it was not forbidden
by the Signory to wear the richest brocade.  For where could a handsome
young scholar not be welcome when he could touch the lute and troll a
gay song?  That bright face, that easy smile, that liquid voice, seemed
to give life a holiday aspect; just as a strain of gay music and the
hoisting of colours make the work-worn and the sad rather ashamed of
showing themselves.  Here was a professor likely to render the Greek
classics amiable to the sons of great houses.

And that was not the whole of Tito's good fortune; for he had sold all
his jewels, except the ring he did not choose to part with, and he was
master of full five hundred gold florins.

Yet the moment when he first had this sum in his possession was the
crisis of the first serious struggle his facile, good-humoured nature
had known.  An importunate thought, of which he had till now refused to
see more than the shadow as it dogged his footsteps, at last rushed upon
him and grasped him: he was obliged to pause and decide whether he would
surrender and obey, or whether he would give the refusal that must carry
irrevocable consequences.  It was in the room above Nello's shop, which
Tito had now hired as a lodging, that the elder Cennini handed him the
last quota of the sum on behalf of Bernardo Rucellai, the purchaser of
the two most valuable gems.

"_Ecco, giovane mio_!" said the respectable printer and goldsmith, "you
have now a pretty little fortune; and if you will take my advice, you
will let me place your florins in a safe quarter, where they may
increase and multiply, instead of slipping through your fingers for
banquets and other follies which are rife among our Florentine youth.
And it has been too much the fashion of scholars, especially when, like
our Pietro Crinito, they think their scholarship needs to be scented and
broidered, to squander with one hand till they have been fain to beg
with the other.  I have brought you the money, and you are free to make
a wise choice or an unwise: I shall see on which side the balance dips.
We Florentines hold no man a member of an Art till he has shown his
skill and been matriculated; and no man is matriculated to the art of
life till he has been well tempted.  If you make up your mind to put
your florins out to usury, you can let me know to-morrow.  A scholar may
marry, and should have something in readiness for the _morgen-cap.
Addio_."  [Note 1.]

As Cennini closed the door behind him, Tito turned round with the smile
dying out of his face, and fixed his eyes on the table where the florins
lay.  He made no other movement, but stood with his thumbs in his belt,
looking down, in that transfixed state which accompanies the
concentration of consciousness on some inward image.

"A man's ransom!"--who was it that had said five hundred florins was
more than a man's ransom?  If now, under this mid-day sun, on some hot
coast far away, a man somewhat stricken in years--a man not without high
thoughts and with the most passionate heart--a man who long years ago
had rescued a little boy from a life of beggary, filth, and cruel wrong,
had reared him tenderly, and been to him as a father--if that man _were_
now under this summer sun toiling as a slave, hewing wood and drawing
water, perhaps being smitten and buffeted because he was not deft and
active?  If he were saying to himself, "Tito will find me: he had but to
carry our manuscripts and gems to Venice; he will have raised money, and
will never rest till he finds me out"?  If that were certain, could he,
Tito, see the price of the gems lying before him, and say, "I will stay
at Florence, where I am fanned by soft airs of promised love and
prosperity; I will not risk myself for his sake"?  No, surely not, _if
it were certain_.  But nothing could be farther from certainty.  The
galley had been taken by a Turkish vessel on its way to Delos: _that_
was known by the report of the companion galley, which had escaped.  But
there had been resistance, and probable bloodshed; a man had been seen
falling overboard: who were the survivors, and what had befallen them
amongst all the multitude of possibilities?  Had not he, Tito, suffered
shipwreck, and narrowly escaped drowning?  He had good cause for feeling
the omnipresence of casualties that threatened all projects with
futility.  The rumour that there were pirates who had a settlement in
Delos was not to be depended on, or might be nothing to the purpose.
What, probably enough, would be the result if he were to quit Florence
and go to Venice; get authoritative letters--yes, he knew that might be
done--and set out for the Archipelago?  Why, that he should be himself
seized, and spend all his florins on preliminaries, and be again a
destitute wanderer--with no more gems to sell.

Tito had a clearer vision of that result than of the possible moment
when he might find his father again, and carry him deliverance.  It
would surely be an unfairness that he, in his full ripe youth, to whom
life had hitherto had some of the stint and subjection of a school,
should turn his back on promised love and distinction, and perhaps never
be visited by that promise again.  "And yet," he said to himself, "if I
were certain that Baldassarre Calvo was alive, and that I could free
him, by whatever exertions or perils, I would go now--now I have the
money: it was useless to debate the matter before.  I would go now to
Bardo and Bartolommeo Scala, and tell them the whole truth."  Tito did
not say to himself so distinctly that if those two men had known the
whole truth he was aware there would have been no alternative for him
but to go in search of his benefactor, who, if alive, was the rightful
owner of the gems, and whom he had always equivocally spoken of as
"lost;" he did not say to himself--what he was not ignorant of--that
Greeks of distinction had made sacrifices, taken voyages again and
again, and sought help from crowned and mitred heads for the sake of
freeing relatives from slavery to the Turks.  Public opinion did not
regard this as exceptional virtue.

This was his first real colloquy with himself: he had gone on following
the impulses of the moment, and one of those impulses had been to
conceal half the fact; he had never considered this part of his conduct
long enough to face the consciousness of his motives for the
concealment.  What was the use of telling the whole?  It was true, the
thought had crossed his mind several times since he had quitted Nauplia
that, after all, it was a great relief to be quit of Baldassarre, and he
would have liked to know _who_ it was that had fallen overboard.  But
such thoughts spring inevitably out of a relation that is irksome.
Baldassarre was exacting, and had got stranger as he got older: he was
constantly scrutinising Tito's mind to see whether it answered to his
own exaggerated expectations; and age--the age of a thickset,
heavy-browed, bald man beyond sixty, whose intensity and eagerness in
the grasp of ideas have long taken the character of monotony and
repetition, may be looked at from many points of view without being
found attractive.  Such a man, stranded among new acquaintances, unless
he had the philosopher's stone, would hardly find rank, youth, and
beauty at his feet.  The feelings that gather fervour from novelty will
be of little help towards making the world a home for dimmed and faded
human beings; and if there is any love of which they are not widowed, it
must be the love that is rooted in memories and distils perpetually the
sweet balms of fidelity and forbearing tenderness.

But surely such memories were not absent from Tito's mind?  Far in the
backward vista of his remembered life, when he was only seven years old,
Baldassarre had rescued him from blows, had taken him to a home that
seemed like opened paradise, where there was sweet food and soothing
caresses, all had on Baldassarre's knee; and from that time till the
hour they had parted, Tito had been the one centre of Baldassarre's
fatherly cares.

And he had been docile, pliable, quick of apprehension, ready to
acquire: a very bright lovely boy, a youth of even splendid grace, who
seemed quite without vices, as if that beautiful form represented a
vitality so exquisitely poised and balanced that it could know no uneasy
desires, no unrest--a radiant presence for a lonely man to have won for
himself.  If he were silent when his father expected some response,
still he did not look moody; if he declined some labour--why, he flung
himself down with such a charming, half-smiling, half-pleading air, that
the pleasure of looking at him made amends to one who had watched his
growth with a sense of claim and possession: the curves of Tito's mouth
had ineffable good-humour in them.  And then, the quick talent to which
everything came readily, from philosophical systems to the rhymes of a
street ballad caught up at a hearing!  Would any one have said that Tito
had not made a rich return to his benefactor, or that his gratitude and
affection would fail on any great demand?

He did not admit that his gratitude had failed; but _it was not certain_
that Baldassarre was in slavery, not certain that he was living.

"Do I not owe something to myself?" said Tito, inwardly, with a slight
movement of his shoulders, the first he had made since he had turned to
look down at the florins.  "Before I quit everything, and incur again
all the risks of which I am even now weary, I must at least have a
reasonable hope.  Am I to spend my life in a wandering search?  _I
believe he is dead_.  Cennini was right about my florins: I will place
them in his hands to-morrow."

When, the next morning, Tito put this determination into act he had
chosen his colour in the game, and had given an inevitable bent to his
wishes.  He had made it impossible that he should not from henceforth
desire it to be the truth that his father was dead; impossible that he
should not be tempted to baseness rather than that the precise facts of
his conduct should not remain for ever concealed.

Under every guilty secret there is hidden a brood of guilty wishes,
whose unwholesome infecting life is cherished by the darkness.  The
contaminating effect of deeds often lies less in the commission than in
the consequent adjustment of our desires--the enlistment of our
self-interest on the side of falsity; as, on the other hand, the
purifying influence of public confession springs from the fact, that by
it the hope in lies is for ever swept away, and the soul recovers the
noble attitude of simplicity.

Besides, in this first distinct colloquy with himself the ideas which
had previously been scattered and interrupted had now concentrated
themselves; the little rills of selfishness had united and made a
channel, so that they could never again meet with the same resistance.
Hitherto Tito had left in vague indecision the question whether, with
the means in his power, he would not return, and ascertain his father's
fate; he had now made a definite excuse to himself for not taking that
course; he had avowed to himself a choice which he would have been
ashamed to avow to others, and which would have made him ashamed in the
resurgent presence of his father.  But the inward shame, the reflex of
that outward law which the great heart of mankind makes for every
individual man, a reflex which will exist even in the absence of the
sympathetic impulses that need no law, but rush to the deed of fidelity
and pity as inevitably as the brute mother shields her young from the
attack of the hereditary enemy--that inward shame was showing its
blushes in Tito's determined assertion to himself that his father was
dead, or that at least search was hopeless.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Note 1.  A sum given by the bridegroom to the bride the day after the
marriage.  _Morgengabe_.



CHAPTER TEN.

UNDER THE PLANE-TREE.

On the day of San Giovanni it was already three weeks ago that Tito had
handed his florins to Cennini, and we have seen that as he set out
towards the Via de' Bardi he showed all the outward signs of a mind at
ease.  How should it be otherwise?  He never jarred with what was
immediately around him, and his nature was too joyous, too
unapprehensive, for the hidden and the distant to grasp him in the shape
of a dread.  As he turned out of the hot sunshine into the shelter of a
narrow street, took off the black cloth berretta, or simple cap with
upturned lappet, which just crowned his brown curls, pushing his hair
and tossing his head backward to court the cooler air, there was no
brand of duplicity on his brow; neither was there any stamp of candour:
it was simply a finely-formed, square, smooth young brow.  And the slow
absent glance he cast around at the upper windows of the houses had
neither more dissimulation in it, nor more ingenuousness, than belongs
to a youthful well-opened eyelid with its unwearied breadth of gaze; to
perfectly pellucid lenses; to the undimmed dark of a rich brown iris;
and to a pure cerulean-tinted angle of whiteness streaked with the
delicate shadows of long eyelashes.  Was it that Tito's face attracted
or repelled according to the mental attitude of the observer?  Was it a
cypher with more than one key?  The strong, unmistakable expression in
his whole air and person was a negative one, and it was perfectly
veracious; it declared the absence of any uneasy claim, any restless
vanity, and it made the admiration that followed him as he passed among
the troop of holiday-makers a thoroughly willing tribute.

For by this time the stir of the Festa was felt even in the narrowest
side-streets; the throng which had at one time been concentrated in the
lines through which the procession had to pass, was now streaming out in
all directions in pursuit of a new object.  Such intervals of a Festa
are precisely the moments when the vaguely active animal spirits of a
crowd are likely to be the most petulant and most ready to sacrifice a
stray individual to the greater happiness of the greater number.  As
Tito entered the neighbourhood of San Martino, he found the throng
rather denser; and near the hostelry of the _Bertucce_, or Baboons,
there was evidently some object which was arresting the passengers and
forming them into a knot.  It needed nothing of great interest to draw
aside passengers unfreighted with a purpose, and Tito was preparing to
turn aside into an adjoining street, when, amidst the loud laughter, his
ear discerned a distressed childish voice crying, "Loose me!  Holy
Virgin, help me!" which at once determined him to push his way into the
knot of gazers.  He had just had time to perceive that the distressed
voice came from a young contadina, whose white hood had fallen off in
the struggle to get her hands free from the grasp of a man in the
parti-coloured dress of a _cerretano_, or conjuror, who was making
laughing attempts to soothe and cajole her, evidently carrying with him
the amused sympathy of the spectators.  These, by a persuasive variety
of words signifying simpleton, for which the Florentine dialect is rich
in equivalents, seemed to be arguing with the contadina against her
obstinacy.  At the first moment the girl's face was turned away, and he
saw only her light-brown hair plaited and fastened with a long silver
pin; but in the next, the struggle brought her face opposite Tito's, and
he saw the baby features of Tessa, her blue eyes filled with tears, and
her under-lip quivering.  Tessa, too, saw _him_, and through the mist of
her swelling tears there beamed a sudden hope, like that in the face of
a little child, when, held by a stranger against its will, it sees a
familiar hand stretched out.

In an instant Tito had pushed his way through the barrier of bystanders,
whose curiosity made them ready to turn aside at the sudden interference
of this handsome young signor, had grasped Tessa's waist, and had said,
"Loose this child!  What right have you to hold her against her will?"

The conjuror--a man with one of those faces in which the angles of the
eyes and eyebrows, of the nostrils, mouth, and sharply-defined jaw, all
tend upward--showed his small regular teeth in an impish but not
ill-natured grin, as he let go Tessa's hands, and stretched out his own
backward, shrugging his shoulders, and bending them forward a little in
a half-apologetic, half-protesting manner.

"I mean the ragazza no evil in the world, Messere: ask this respectable
company.  I was only going to show them a few samples of my skill, in
which this little damsel might have helped me the better because of her
kitten face, which would have assured them of open dealing; and I had
promised her a lapful of confetti as a reward.  But what then?  Messer
has doubtless better confetti at hand, and she knows it."

A general laugh among the bystanders accompanied these last words of the
conjuror, raised, probably, by the look of relief and confidence with
which Tessa clung to Tito's arm, as he drew it from her waist, and
placed her hand within it.  She only cared about the laugh as she might
have cared about the roar of wild beasts from which she was escaping,
not attaching any meaning to it; but Tito, who had no sooner got her on
his arm than he foresaw some embarrassment in the situation, hastened to
get clear of observers who, having been despoiled of an expected
amusement, were sure to re-establish the balance by jests.

"See, see, little one! here is your hood," said the conjuror, throwing
the bit of white drapery over Tessa's head.  "_Orsu_, bear me no malice;
come back to me when Messere can spare you."

"Ah!  Maestro Vaiano, she'll come back presently, as the toad said to
the harrow," called out one of the spectators, seeing how Tessa started
and shrank at the action of the conjuror.

Tito pushed his way vigorously towards the corner of a side-street, a
little vexed at this delay in his progress to the Via de' Bardi, and
intending to get rid of the poor little contadina as soon as possible.
The next street, too, had its passengers inclined to make holiday
remarks on so unusual a pair; but they had no sooner entered it than he
said, in a kind but hurried manner, "Now, little one, where were you
going?  Are you come by yourself to the Festa?"

"Ah, no!" said Tessa, looking frightened and distressed again; "I have
lost my mother in the crowd--her and my father-in-law.  They will be
angry--he will beat me.  It was in the crowd in San Pulinari--somebody
pushed me along and I couldn't stop myself, so I got away from them.
Oh, I don't know where they're gone!  Please, don't leave me!"

Her eyes had been swelling with tears again, and she ended with a sob.

Tito hurried along again: the Church of the Badia was not far off.  They
could enter it by the cloister that opened at the back, and in the
church he could talk to Tessa--perhaps leave her.  No! it was an hour at
which the church was not open; but they paused under the shelter of the
cloister, and he said, "Have you no cousin or friend in Florence, my
little Tessa, whose house you could find; or are you afraid of walking
by yourself since you have been frightened by the conjuror?  I am in a
hurry to get to Oltrarno, but if I could take you anywhere near--"

"Oh, I _am_ frightened: he was the devil--I know he was.  And I don't
know where to go.  I have nobody: and my mother meant to have her dinner
somewhere, and I don't know where.  Holy Madonna!  I shall be beaten."

The corners of the pouting mouth went down piteously, and the poor
little bosom with the beads on it above the green serge gown heaved so,
that there was no longer any help for it: a loud sob _would_ come, and
the big tears fell as if they were making up for lost time.  Here was a
situation!  It would have been brutal to leave her, and Tito's nature
was all gentleness.  He wished at that moment that he had not been
expected in the Via de' Bardi.  As he saw her lifting up her holiday
apron to catch the hurrying tears, he laid his hand, too, on the apron,
and rubbed one of the cheeks and kissed the baby-like roundness.

"My poor little Tessa! leave off crying.  Let us see what can be done.
Where is your home--where do you live?"

There was no answer, but the sobs began to subside a little and the
drops to fall less quickly.

"Come!  I'll take you a little way, if you'll tell me where you want to
go."

The apron fell, and Tessa's face began to look as contented as a
cherub's budding from a cloud.  The diabolical conjuror, the anger and
the beating, seemed a long way off.

"I think I'll go home, if you'll take me," she said, in a half whisper,
looking up at Tito with wide blue eyes, and with something sweeter than
a smile--with a childlike calm.

"Come, then, little one," said Tito, in a caressing tone, putting her
arm within his again.  "Which way is it?"

"Beyond Peretola--where the large pear-tree is."

"Peretola?  Out at which gate, pazzarella?  I am a stranger, you must
remember."

"Out at the Por del Prato," said Tessa, moving along with a very fast
hold on Tito's arm.

He did not know all the turnings well enough to venture on an attempt at
choosing the quietest streets; and besides, it occurred to him that
where the passengers were most numerous there was, perhaps, the most
chance of meeting with Monna Ghita and finding an end to his
knight-errant-ship.  So he made straight for Porta Rossa, and on to
Ognissanti, showing his usual bright propitiatory face to the mixed
observers who threw their jests at him and his little heavy-shod maiden
with much liberality.  Mingled with the more decent holiday-makers there
were frolicsome apprentices, rather envious of his good fortune;
bold-eyed women with the badge of the yellow veil; beggars who thrust
forward their caps for alms, in derision at Tito's evident haste;
dicers, sharpers, and loungers of the worst sort; boys whose tongues
were used to wag in concert at the most brutal street games: for the
streets of Florence were not always a moral spectacle in those times,
and Tessa's terror at being lost in the crowd was not wholly
unreasonable.

When they reached the Piazza d'Ognissanti, Tito slackened his pace: they
were both heated with their hurried walk, and here was a wider space
where they could take breath.  They sat down on one of the stone benches
which were frequent against the walls of old Florentine houses.

"Holy Virgin!" said Tessa; "I am glad we have got away from those women
and boys; but I was not frightened, because you could take care of me."

"Pretty little Tessa!" said Tito, smiling at her.  "What makes you feel
so safe with me?"

"Because you are so beautiful--like the people going into Paradise: they
are all good."

"It is a long while since you had your breakfast, Tessa," said Tito,
seeing some stalls near, with fruit and sweetmeats upon them.  "Are you
hungry?"

"Yes, I think I am--if you will have some too."

Tito bought some apricots, and cakes, and comfits, and put them into her
apron.

"Come," he said, "let us walk on to the Prato, and then perhaps you will
not be afraid to go the rest of the way alone."

"But you will have some of the apricots and things," said Tessa, rising
obediently and gathering up her apron as a bag for her store.

"We will see," said Tito aloud; and to himself he said, "Here is a
little contadina who might inspire a better idyl than Lorenzo de'
Medici's `Nencia da Barberino,' that Nello's friends rave about; if I
were only a Theocritus, or had time to cultivate the necessary
experience by unseasonable walks of this sort!  However, the mischief is
done now: I am so late already that another half-hour will make no
difference.  Pretty little pigeon!"

"We have a garden and plenty of pears," said Tessa, "and two cows,
besides the mules; and I'm very fond of them.  But my father-in-law is a
cross man: I wish my mother had not married him.  I think he is wicked;
he is very ugly."

"And does your mother let him beat you, poverina?  You said you were
afraid of being beaten."

"Ah, my mother herself scolds me: she loves my young sister better, and
thinks I don't do work enough.  Nobody speaks kindly to me, only the
Pievano (parish priest) when I go to confession.  And the men in the
Mercato laugh at me and make fun of me.  Nobody ever kissed me and spoke
to me as you do; just as I talk to my little black-faced kid, because
I'm very fond of it."

It seemed not to have entered Tessa's mind that there was any change in
Tito's appearance since the morning he begged the milk from her, and
that he looked now like a personage for whom she must summon her little
stock of reverent words and signs.  He had impressed her too differently
from any human being who had ever come near her before, for her to make
any comparison of details; she took no note of his dress; he was simply
a voice and a face to her, something come from Paradise into a world
where most things seemed hard and angry; and she prattled with as little
restraint as if he had been an imaginary companion born of her own
lovingness and the sunshine.

They had now reached the Prato, which at that time was a large open
space within the walls, where the Florentine youth played at their
favourite _Calcio_--a peculiar kind of football--and otherwise exercised
themselves.  At this mid-day time it was forsaken and quiet to the very
gates, where a tent had been erected in preparation for the race.  On
the border of this wide meadow, Tito paused and said--

"Now, Tessa, you will not be frightened if I leave you to walk the rest
of the way by yourself.  Addio!  Shall I come and buy a cup of milk from
you in the Mercato to-morrow morning, to see that you are quite safe?"

He added this question in a soothing tone, as he saw her eyes widening
sorrowfully, and the corners of her mouth falling.  She said nothing at
first; she only opened her apron and looked down at her apricots and
sweetmeats.  Then she looked up at him again and said complainingly--

"I thought you would have some, and we could sit down under a tree
outside the gate, and eat them together."

"Tessa, Tessa, you little siren, you would ruin me," said Tito,
laughing, and kissing both her cheeks.  "I ought to have been in the Via
de' Bardi long ago.  No!  I must go back now; you are in no danger.
There--I'll take an apricot.  Addio!"

He had already stepped two yards from her when he said the last word.
Tessa could not have spoken; she was pale, and a great sob was rising;
but she turned round as if she felt there was no hope for her, and
stepped on, holding her apron so forgetfully that the apricots began to
roll out on the grass.

Tito could not help looking after her, and seeing her shoulders rise to
the bursting sob, and the apricots fall--could not help going after her
and picking them up.  It was very hard upon him: he was a long way off
the Via de' Bardi, and very near to Tessa.

"See, my silly one," he said, picking up the apricots.  "Come, leave off
crying, I will go with you, and we'll sit down under the tree.  Come, I
don't like to see you cry; but you know I must go kick some time."

So it came to pass that they found a great plane-tree not far outside
the gates, and they sat down under it, and all the feast was spread out
on Tessa's lap, she leaning with her back against the trunk of the tree,
and he stretched opposite to her, resting his elbows on the rough green
growth cherished by the shade, while the sunlight stole through the
boughs and played about them like a winged thing.  Tessa's face was all
contentment again, and the taste of the apricots and sweetmeats seemed
very good.

"You pretty bird!" said Tito, looking at her as she sat eyeing the
remains of the feast with an evident mental debate about saving them,
since he had said he would not have any more.  "To think of any one
scolding you!  What sins do you tell of at confession, Tessa?"

"Oh, a great many.  I am often naughty.  I don't like work, and I can't
help being idle, though I know I shall be beaten and scolded; and I give
the mules the best fodder when nobody sees me, and then when the Madre
is angry I say I didn't do it, and that makes me frightened at the
devil.  I think the conjuror was the devil.  I am not so frightened
after I've been to confession.  And see, I've got a _Breve_ here that a
good father, who came to Prato preaching this Easter, blessed and gave
us all."  Here Tessa drew from her bosom a tiny bag carefully fastened
up.  "And I think the holy Madonna will take care of me; she looks as if
she would; and perhaps if I wasn't idle, she wouldn't let me be beaten."

"If they are so cruel to you, Tessa, shouldn't you like to leave them,
and go and live with a beautiful lady who would be kind to you, if she
would have you to wait upon her?"

Tessa seemed to hold her breath for a moment or two.  Then she said
doubtfully, "I don't know."

"Then should you like to be my little servant, and live with me?" said
Tito, smiling.  He meant no more than to see what sort of pretty look
and answer she would give.

There was a flush of joy immediately.  "Will you take me with you now?
Ah!  I shouldn't go home and be beaten then."  She paused a little
while, and then added more doubtfully, "But I should like to fetch my
black-faced kid."

"Yes, you must go back to your kid, my Tessa," said Tito, rising, "and I
must go the other way."

"By Jupiter!" he added, as he went from under the shade of the tree, "it
is not a pleasant time of day to walk from here to the Via de' Bardi; I
am more inclined to lie down and sleep in this shade."

It ended so.  Tito had an unconquerable aversion to anything unpleasant,
even when an object very much loved and desired was on the other side of
it.  He had risen early; had waited; had seen sights, and had been
already walking in the sun: he was inclined for a siesta, and inclined
all the more because little Tessa was there, and seemed to make the air
softer.  He lay down on the grass again, putting his cap under his head
on a green tuft by the side of Tessa.  That was not quite comfortable;
so he moved again, and asked Tessa to let him rest his head against her
lap; and in that way he soon fell asleep.  Tessa sat quiet as a dove on
its nest, just venturing, when he was fast asleep, to touch the
wonderful dark curls that fell backward from his ear.  She was too happy
to go to sleep--too happy to think that Tito would wake up, and that
then he would leave her, and she must go home.  It takes very little
water to make a perfect pool for a tiny fish, where it will find its
world and paradise all in one, and never have a presentiment of the dry
bank.  The fretted summer shade, and stillness, and the gentle breathing
of some loved life near--it would be paradise to us all, if eager
thought, the strong angel with the implacable brow, had not long since
closed the gates.

It really was a long while before the waking came--before the long dark
eyes opened at Tessa, first with a little surprise, and then with a
smile, which was soon quenched by some preoccupying thought.  Tito's
deeper sleep had broken into a doze, in which he felt himself in the Via
de' Bardi, explaining his failure to appear at the appointed time.  The
clear images of that doze urged him to start up at once to a sitting
posture, and as he stretched his arms and shook his cap, he said--

"Tessa, little one, you have let me sleep too long.  My hunger and the
shadows together tell me that the sun has done much travel since I fell
asleep.  I must lose no more time.  Addio," he ended, patting her cheek
with one hand, and settling his cap with the other.

She said nothing, but there were signs in her face which made him speak
again in as serious and as chiding a tone as he could command--

"Now, Tessa, you must not cry.  I shall be angry; I shall not love you
if you cry.  You must go home to your black-faced kid, or if you like
you may go back to the gate and see the horses start.  But I can stay
with you no longer, and if you cry, I shall think you are troublesome to
me."

The rising tears were checked by terror at this change in Tito's voice.
Tessa turned very pale, and sat in trembling silence, with her blue eyes
widened by arrested tears.

"Look now," Tito went on, soothingly, opening the wallet that hung at
his belt, "here is a pretty charm that I have had a long while--ever
since I was in Sicily, a country a long way off."

His wallet had many little matters in it mingled with small coins, and
he had the usual difficulty in laying his finger on the right thing.  He
unhooked his wallet, and turned out the contents on Tessa's lap.  Among
them was his onyx ring.

"Ah, my ring!" he exclaimed, slipping it on the forefinger of his
right-hand.  "I forgot to put it on again this morning.  Strange, I
never missed it!  See, Tessa," he added, as he spread out the smaller
articles, and selected the one he was in search of.  "See this pretty
little pointed bit of red coral--like your goat's horn, is it not?--and
here is a hole in it, so you can put it on the cord round your neck
along with your _Breve_, and then the evil spirits can't hurt you: if
you ever see them coming in the shadow round the corner, point this
little coral horn at them, and they will run away.  It is a `buona
fortuna,' and will keep you from harm when I am not with you.  Come,
undo the cord."

Tessa obeyed with a tranquillising sense that life was going to be
something quite new, and that Tito would be with her often.  All who
remember their childhood remember the strange vague sense, when some new
experience came, that everything else was going to be changed, and that
there would be no lapse into the old monotony.  So the bit of coral was
hung beside the tiny bag with the scrap of scrawled parchment in it, and
Tessa felt braver.

"And now you will give me a kiss," said Tito, economising time by
speaking while he swept in the contents of the wallet and hung it at his
waist again, "and look happy, like a good girl, and then--"

But Tessa had obediently put forward her lips in a moment, and kissed
his cheek as he hung down his head.

"Oh, you pretty pigeon!" cried Tito, laughing, pressing her round cheeks
with his hands and crushing her features together so as to give them a
general impartial kiss.

Then he started up and walked away, not looking round till he was ten
yards from her, when he just turned and gave a parting beck.  Tessa was
looking after him, but he could see that she was making no signs of
distress.  It was enough for Tito if she did not cry while he was
present.  The softness of his nature required that all sorrow should be
hidden away from him.

"I wonder when Romola will kiss my cheek in that way?" thought Tito, as
he walked along.  It seemed a tiresome distance now, and he almost
wished he had not been so soft-hearted, or so tempted to linger in the
shade.  No other excuse was needed to Bardo and Romola than saying
simply that he had been unexpectedly hindered; he felt confident their
proud delicacy would inquire no farther.  He lost no time in getting to
Ognissanti, and hastily taking some food there, he crossed the Arno by
the Ponte alia Carraja, and made his way as directly as possible towards
the Via de' Bardi.

But it was the hour when all the world who meant to be in particularly
good time to see the Corso were returning from the Borghi, or villages
just outside the gates, where they had dined and reposed themselves; and
the thoroughfares leading to the bridges were of course the issues
towards which the stream of sightseers tended.  Just as Tito reached the
Ponte Vecchio and the entrance of the Via de' Bardi, he was suddenly
urged back towards the angle of the intersecting streets.  A company on
horseback, coming from the Via Guicciardini, and turning up the Via de'
Bardi, had compelled the foot-passengers to recede hurriedly.  Tito had
been walking, as his manner was, with the thumb of his right-hand
resting in his belt; and as he was thus forced to pause, and was looking
carelessly at the passing cavaliers, he felt a very thin cold hand laid
on his.  He started round, and saw the Dominican friar whose upturned
face had so struck him in the morning.  Seen closer, the face looked
more evidently worn by sickness and not by age; and again it brought
some strong but indefinite reminiscences to Tito.

"Pardon me, but--from your face and your ring,"--said the friar, in a
faint voice, "is not your name Titomelema?"

"Yes," said Tito, also speaking faintly, doubly jarred by the cold touch
and the mystery.  He was not apprehensive or timid through his
imagination, but through his sensations and perceptions he could easily
be made to shrink and turn pale like a maiden.

"Then I shall fulfil my commission."

The friar put his hand under his scapulary, and drawing out a small
linen bag which hung round his neck, took from it a bit of parchment,
doubled and stuck firmly together with some black adhesive substance,
and placed it in Tito's hand.  On the outside was written in Italian, in
a small but distinct character--

"_Tito Melema, aged twenty-three, with a dark, beautiful face, long dark
curls, the brightest smile, and a large onyx ring on his right
forefinger_."

Tito did not look at the friar, but tremblingly broke open the bit of
parchment.  Inside, the words were--

"_I am sold for a slave: I think they are going to take me to Antioch.
The gems alone will serve to ransom me_."

Tito looked round at the friar, but could only ask a question with his
eyes.

"I had it at Corinth," the friar said, speaking with difficulty, like
one whose small strength had been overtaxed--"I had it from a man who
was dying."

"He is dead, then?" said Tito, with a bounding of the heart.

"Not the writer.  The man who gave it me was a pilgrim, like myself, to
whom the writer had intrusted it, because he was journeying to Italy."

"You know the contents?"

"I do not know them, but I conjecture them.  Your friend is in slavery:
you will go and release him.  But I am unable to talk now."  The friar,
whose voice had become feebler and feebler, sank down on the stone bench
against the wall from which he had risen to touch Tito's hand, adding--

"I am at San Marco; my name is Fra Luca."



CHAPTER ELEVEN.

TITO'S DILEMMA.

When Fra Luca had ceased to speak, Tito still stood by him in
irresolution, and it was not till, the pressure of the passengers being
removed, the friar rose and walked slowly into the church of Santa
Felicita, that Tito also went on his way along the Via de' Bardi.

"If this monk is a Florentine," he said to himself; "if he is going to
remain at Florence, everything must be disclosed."  He felt that a new
crisis had come, but he was not, for all that, too evidently agitated to
pay his visit to Bardo, and apologise for his previous non-appearance.
Tito's talent for concealment was being fast developed into something
less neutral.  It was still possible--perhaps it might be inevitable--
for him to accept frankly the altered conditions, and avow Baldassarre's
existence; but hardly without casting an unpleasant light backward on
his original reticence as studied equivocation in order to avoid the
fulfilment of a secretly recognised claim, to say nothing of his quiet
settlement of himself and investment of his florins, when, it would be
clear, his benefactor's fate had not been certified.  It was at least
provisionally wise to act as if nothing had happened, and for the
present he would suspend decisive thought; there was all the night for
meditation, and no one would know the precise moment at which he had
received the letter.

So he entered the room on the second storey--where Romola and her father
sat among the parchment and the marble, aloof from the life of the
streets on holidays as well as on common days--with a face only a little
less bright than usual, from regret at appearing so late: a regret which
wanted no testimony, since he had given up the sight of the Corso in
order to express it; and then set himself to throw extra animation into
the evening, though all the while his consciousness was at work like a
machine with complex action, leaving deposits quite distinct from the
line of talk; and by the time he descended the stone stairs and issued
from the grim door in the starlight, his mind had really reached a new
stage in its formation of a purpose.

And when, the next day, after he was free from his professorial work, he
turned up the Via del Cocomero towards the convent of San Marco, his
purpose was fully shaped.  He was going to ascertain from Fra Luca
precisely how much he conjectured of the truth, and on what grounds he
conjectured it; and, further, how long he was to remain at San Marco.
And on that fuller knowledge he hoped to mould a statement which would
in any case save him from the necessity of quitting Florence.  Tito had
never had occasion to fabricate an ingenious lie before: the occasion
was come now--the occasion which circumstance never fails to beget on
tacit falsity; and his ingenuity was ready.  For he had convinced
himself that he was not bound to go in search of Baldassarre.  He had
once said that on a fair assurance of his father's existence and
whereabout, he would unhesitatingly go after him.  But, after all, _why_
was he bound to go?  What, looked at closely, was the end of all life,
but to extract the utmost sum of pleasure?  And was not his own blooming
life a promise of incomparably more pleasure, not for himself only, but
for others, than the withered wintry life of a man who was past the time
of keen enjoyment, and whose ideas had stiffened into barren rigidity?
Those ideas had all been sown in the fresh soil of Tito's mind, and were
lively germs there: that was the proper order of things--the order of
nature, which treats all maturity as a mere nidus for youth.
Baldassarre had done his work, had had his draught of life: Tito said it
was _his_ turn now.

And the prospect was so vague:--"I think they are going to take me to
Antioch:" here was a vista!  After a long voyage, to spend months,
perhaps years, in a search for which even now there was no guarantee
that it would not prove vain: and to leave behind at starting a life of
distinction and love: and to find, if he found anything, the old
exacting companionship which was known by rote beforehand.  Certainly
the gems and therefore the florins were, in a sense, Baldassarre's: in
the narrow sense by which the right of possession is determined in
ordinary affairs; but in that large and more radically natural view by
which the world belongs to youth and strength, they were rather his who
could extract the most pleasure out of them.  That, he was conscious,
was not the sentiment which the complicated play of human feelings had
engendered in society.  The men around him would expect that he should
immediately apply those florins to his benefactor's rescue.  But what
was the sentiment of society?--a mere tangle of anomalous traditions and
opinions, which no wise man would take as a guide, except so far as his
own comfort was concerned.  Not that he cared for the florins save
perhaps for Romola's sake: he would give up the florins readily enough.
It was the joy that was due to him and was close to his lips, which he
felt he was not bound to thrust away from him and so travel on,
thirsting.  Any maxims that required a man to fling away the good that
was needed to make existence sweet, were only the lining of human
selfishness turned outward: they were made by men who wanted others to
sacrifice themselves for their sake.  He would rather that Baldassarre
should not suffer: he liked no one to suffer; but could any philosophy
prove to him that he was bound to care for another's suffering more than
for his own?  To do so he must have loved Baldassarre devotedly, and he
did _not_ love him: was that his own fault?  Gratitude! seen closely, it
made no valid claim: his father's life would have been dreary without
him: are we convicted of a debt to men for the pleasures they give
themselves?

Having once begun to explain away Baldassarre's claim, Tito's thought
showed itself as active as a virulent acid, eating its rapid way through
all the tissues of sentiment.  His mind was destitute of that dread
which has been erroneously decried as if it were nothing higher than a
man's animal care for his own skin: that awe of the Divine Nemesis which
was felt by religious pagans, and, though it took a more positive form
under Christianity, is still felt by the mass of mankind simply as a
vague fear at anything which is called wrong-doing.  Such terror of the
unseen is so far above mere sensual cowardice that it will annihilate
that cowardice: it is the initial recognition of a moral law restraining
desire, and checks the hard bold scrutiny of imperfect thought into
obligations which can never be proved to have any sanctity in the
absence of feeling.  "It is good," sing the old Eumenides, in Aeschylus,
"that fear should sit as the guardian of the soul, forcing it into
wisdom--good that men should carry a threatening shadow in their hearts
under the full sunshine; else, how should they learn to revere the
right?"  That guardianship may become needless; but only when all
outward law has become needless--only when duty and love have united in
one stream and made a common force.

As Tito entered the outer cloister of San Marco, and inquired for Fra
Luca, there was no shadowy presentiment in his mind: he felt himself too
cultured and sceptical for that: he had been nurtured in contempt for
the tales of priests whose impudent lives were a proverb, and in erudite
familiarity with disputes concerning the Chief Good, which had after
all, he considered, left it a matter of taste.  Yet fear was a strong
element in Tito's nature--the fear of what he believed or saw was likely
to rob him of pleasure: and he had a definite fear that Fra Luca might
be the means of driving him from Florence.

"Fra Luca? ah, he is gone to Fiesole--to the Dominican monastery there.
He was taken on a litter in the cool of the morning.  The poor Brother
is very ill.  Could you leave a message for him?"

This answer was given by a _fra converso_, or lay brother, whose accent
told plainly that he was a raw contadino, and whose dull glance implied
no curiosity.

"Thanks; my business can wait."

Tito turned away with a sense of relief.  "This friar is not likely to
live," he said to himself.  "I saw he was worn to a shadow.  And at
Fiesole there will be nothing to recall me to his mind.  Besides, if he
should come back, my explanation will serve as well then as now.  But I
wish I knew what it was that his face recalled to me."



CHAPTER TWELVE.

THE PRIZE IS NEARLY GRASPED.

Tito walked along with a light step, for the immediate fear had
vanished; the usual joyousness of his disposition reassumed its
predominance, and he was going to see Romola.  Yet Romola's life seemed
an image of that loving, pitying devotedness, that patient endurance of
irksome tasks, from which he had shrunk and excused himself.  But he was
not out of love with goodness, or prepared to plunge into vice: he was
in his fresh youth, with soft pulses for all charm and loveliness; he
had still a healthy appetite for ordinary human joys, and the poison
could only work by degrees.  He had sold himself to evil, but at present
life seemed so nearly the same to him that he was not conscious of the
bond.  He meant all things to go on as they had done before, both within
and without him: he meant to win golden opinions by meritorious
exertion, by ingenious learning, by amiable compliance: he was not going
to do anything that would throw him out of harmony with the beings he
cared for.  And he cared supremely for Romola; he wished to have her for
his beautiful and loving wife.  There might be a wealthier alliance
within the ultimate reach of successful accomplishments like his, but
there was no woman in all Florence like Romola.  When she was near him,
and looked at him with her sincere hazel eyes, he was subdued by a
delicious influence as strong and inevitable as those musical vibrations
which take possession of us with a rhythmic empire that no sooner ceases
than we desire it to begin again.

As he trod the stone stairs, when he was still outside the door, with no
one but Maso near him, the influence seemed to have begun its work by
the mere nearness of anticipation.

"Welcome, Tito mio," said the old man's voice, before Tito had spoken.
There was a new vigour in the voice, a new cheerfulness in the blind
face, since that first interview more than two months ago.  "You have
brought fresh manuscript, doubtless; but since we were talking last
night I have had new ideas: we must take a wider scope--we must go back
upon our footsteps."

Tito, paying his homage to Romola as he advanced, went, as his custom
was, straight to Bardo's chair, and put his hand in the palm that was
held to receive it, placing himself on the cross-legged leather seat
with scrolled ends, close to Bardo's elbow.

"Yes," he said, in his gentle way; "I have brought the new manuscript,
but that can wait your pleasure.  I have young limbs, you know, and can
walk back up the hill without any difficulty."

He did not look at Romola as he said this, but he knew quite well that
her eyes were fixed on him with delight.

"That is well said, my son."  Bardo had already addressed Tito in this
way once or twice of late.  "And I perceive with gladness that you do
not shrink from labour, without which, the poet has wisely said, life
has given nothing to mortals.  It is too often the `palma sine pulvere,'
the prize of glory without the dust of the race, that attracts young
ambition.  But what says the Greek?  `In the morning of life, work; in
the mid-day, give counsel; in the evening, pray.'  It is true, I might
be thought to have reached that helpless evening; but not so, while I
have counsel within me which is yet unspoken.  For my mind, as I have
often said, was shut up as by a dam; the plenteous waters lay dark and
motionless; but you, my Tito, have opened a duct for them, and they rush
forward with a force that surprises myself.  And now, what I want is,
that we should go over our preliminary ground again, with a wider scheme
of comment and illustration: otherwise I may lose opportunities which I
now see retrospectively, and which may never occur again.  You mark what
I am saying, Tito?"

He had just stooped to reach his manuscript, which had rolled down, and
Bardo's jealous ear was alive to the slight movement.

Tito might have been excused for shrugging his shoulders at the prospect
before him, but he was not naturally impatient; moreover, he had been
bred up in that laborious erudition, at once minute and copious, which
was the chief intellectual task of the age; and with Romola near, he was
floated along by waves of agreeable sensation that made everything seem
easy.

"Assuredly," he said; "you wish to enlarge your comments on certain
passages we have cited."

"Not only so; I wish to introduce an occasional _excursus_, where we
have noticed an author to whom I have given special study; for I may die
too soon to achieve any separate work.  And this is not a time for
scholarly integrity and well-sifted learning to lie idle, when it is not
only rash ignorance that we have to fear, but when there are men like
Calderino, who, as Poliziano has well shown, have recourse to impudent
falsities of citation to serve the ends of their vanity and secure a
triumph to their own mistakes.  Wherefore, my Tito, I think it not well
that we should let slip the occasion that lies under our hands.  And now
we will turn back to the point where we have cited the passage from
Thucydides, and I wish you, by way of preliminary, to go with me through
all my notes on the Latin translation made by Lorenzo Valla, for which
the incomparable Pope Nicholas the Fifth--with whose personal notice I
was honoured while I was yet young, and when he was still Thomas of
Sarzana--paid him (I say not unduly) the sum of five hundred gold scudi.
But inasmuch as Valla, though otherwise of dubious fame, is held in
high honour for his severe scholarship, whence the epigrammatist has
jocosely said of him that since he went among the shades, Pluto himself
has not dared to speak in the ancient languages, it is the more needful
that his name should not be as a stamp warranting false wares; and
therefore I would introduce an _excursus_ on Thucydides, wherein my
castigations of Valla's text may find a fitting place.  My Romola, thou
wilt reach the needful volumes--thou knowest them--on the fifth shelf of
the cabinet."

Tito rose at the same moment with Romola, saying, "I will reach them, if
you will point them out," and followed her hastily into the adjoining
small room, where the walls were also covered with ranges of books in
perfect order.

"There they are," said Romola, pointing upward; "every book is just
where it was when my father ceased to see them."

Tito stood by her without hastening to reach the books.  They had never
been in this room together before.

"I hope," she continued, turning her eyes full on Tito, with a look of
grave confidence--"I hope he will not weary you; this work makes him so
happy."

"And me too, Romola--if you will only let me say, I love you--if you
will only think me worth loving a little."

His speech was the softest murmur, and the dark beautiful face, nearer
to hers than it had ever been before, was looking at her with beseeching
tenderness.

"I do love you," murmured Romola; she looked at him with the same simple
majesty as ever, but her voice had never in her life before sunk to that
murmur.  It seemed to them both that they were looking at each other a
long while before her lips moved again; yet it was but a moment till she
said, "I know _now_ what it is to be happy."

The faces just met, and the dark curls mingled for an instant with the
rippling gold.  Quick as lightning after that, Tito set his foot on a
projecting ledge of the book-shelves and reached down the needful
volumes.  They were both contented to be silent and separate, for that
first blissful experience of mutual consciousness was all the more
exquisite for being unperturbed by immediate sensation.

It had all been as rapid as the irreversible mingling of waters, for
even the eager and jealous Bardo had not become impatient.

"You have the volumes, my Romola?" the old man said, as they came near
him again.  "And now you will get your pen ready; for, as Tito marks off
the scholia we determine on extracting, it will be well for you to copy
them without delay--numbering them carefully, mind, to correspond with
the numbers in the text which he will write."

Romola always had some task which gave her a share in this joint work.
Tito took his stand at the leggio, where he both wrote and read, and she
placed herself at a table just in front of him, where she was ready to
give into her father's hands anything that he might happen to want, or
relieve him of a volume that he had done with.  They had always been in
that position since the work began, yet on this day it seemed new; it
was so different now for them to be opposite each other; so different
for Tito to take a book from her, as she lifted it from her father's
knee.  Yet there was no finesse to secure an additional look or touch.
Each woman creates in her own likeness the love-tokens that are offered
to her; and Romola's deep calm happiness encompassed Tito like the rich
but quiet evening light which dissipates all unrest.

They had been two hours at their work, and were just desisting because
of the fading light, when the door opened and there entered a figure
strangely incongruous with the current of their thoughts and with the
suggestions of every object around them.  It was the figure of a short
stout black-eyed woman, about fifty, wearing a black velvet berretta, or
close cap, embroidered with pearls, under which surprisingly massive
black braids surmounted the little bulging forehead, and fell in rich
plaited curves over the ears, while an equally surprising carmine tint
on the upper region of the fat cheeks contrasted with the surrounding
sallowness.  Three rows of pearls and a lower necklace of gold reposed
on the horizontal cushion of her neck; the embroidered border of her
trailing black velvet gown and her embroidered long-drooping sleeves of
rose-coloured damask, were slightly faded, but they conveyed to the
initiated eye the satisfactory assurance that they were the splendid
result of six months' labour by a skilled workman; and the rose-coloured
petticoat, with its dimmed white fringe and seed-pearl arabesques, was
duly exhibited in order to suggest a similar pleasing reflection.  A
handsome coral rosary hung from one side of an inferential belt, which
emerged into certainty with a large clasp of silver wrought in niello;
and, on the other side, where the belt again became inferential, hung a
scarsella, or large purse, of crimson velvet, stitched with pearls.  Her
little fat right-hand, which looked as if it had been made of paste, and
had risen out of shape under partial baking, held a small book of
devotions, also splendid with velvet, pearls, and silver.

The figure was already too familiar to Tito to be startling, for Monna
Brigida was a frequent visitor at Bardo's, being excepted from the
sentence of banishment passed on feminine triviality, on the ground of
her cousinship to his dead wife and her early care for Romola, who now
looked round at her with an affectionate smile, and rose to draw the
leather seat to a due distance from her father's chair, that the coming
gush of talk might not be too near his ear.

"_La cugina_?" said Bardo, interrogatively, detecting the short steps
and the sweeping drapery.

"Yes, it is your cousin," said Monna Brigida, in an alert voice, raising
her fingers smilingly at Tito, and then lifting up her face to be kissed
by Romola.  "Always the troublesome cousin breaking in on your wisdom,"
she went on, seating herself and beginning to fan herself with the white
veil hanging over her arm.  "Well, well; if I didn't bring you some news
of the world now and then, I do believe you'd forget there was anything
in life but these mouldy ancients, who want sprinkling with holy water
if all I hear about them is true.  Not but what the world is bad enough
nowadays, for the scandals that turn up under one's nose at every
corner--_I_ don't want to hear and see such things, but one can't go
about with one's head in a bag; and it was only yesterday--well, well,
you needn't burst out at me, Bardo, I'm not going to tell anything; if
I'm not as wise as the three kings, I know how many legs go into one
boot.  But, nevertheless, Florence is a wicked city--is it not true,
Messer Tito? for you go into the world.  Not but what one must sin a
little--Messer Domeneddio expects that of us, else what are the blessed
sacraments for?  And what I say is, we've got to reverence the saints,
and not to set ourselves up as if we could be like them, else life would
be unbearable; as it will be if things go on after this new fashion.
For what do you think?  I've been at the wedding to-day--Dianora
Acciajoli's with the young Albizzi that there has been so much talk of--
and everybody wondered at its being to-day instead of yesterday; but,
_cieli_! such a wedding as it was might have been put off till the next
Quaresima for a penance.  For there was the bride looking like a white
nun--not so much as a pearl about her--and the bridegroom as solemn as
San Giuseppe.  It's true!  And half the people invited were _Piagnoni_--
they call them _Piagnoni_ [funeral mourners: properly, paid mourners]
now, these new saints of Fra Girolamo's making.  And to think of two
families like the Albizzi and the Acciajoli taking up such notions, when
they could afford to wear the best!  Well, well, they invited me--but
they could do no other, seeing my husband was Luca Antonio's uncle by
the mother's side--and a pretty time I had of it while we waited under
the canopy in front of the house, before they let us in.  I couldn't
stand in my clothes, it seemed, without giving offence; for there was
Monna Berta, who has had worse secrets in her time than any I could tell
of myself, looking askance at me from under her hood like a
_pinzochera_, [a Sister of the Third Order of Saint Francis: an
uncloistered nun] and telling me to read the Frate's book about widows,
from which she had found great guidance.  Holy Madonna! it seems as if
widows had nothing to do now but to buy their coffins, and think it a
thousand years till they get into them, instead of enjoying themselves a
little when they've got their hands free for the first time.  And what
do you think was the music we had, to make our dinner lively?  A long
discourse from Fra Domenico of San Marco, about the doctrines of their
blessed Fra Girolamo--the three doctrines we are all to get by heart;
and he kept marking them off on his fingers till he made my flesh creep:
and the first is, Florence, or the Church--I don't know which, for first
he said one and then the other--shall be scourged; but if he means the
pestilence, the Signory ought to put a stop to such preaching, for it's
enough to raise the swelling under one's arms with fright: but then,
after that, he says Florence is to be regenerated; but what will be the
good of that when we're all dead of the plague, or something else?  And
then, the third thing, and what he said oftenest, is, that it's all to
be in our days: and he marked that off on his thumb, till he made me
tremble like the very jelly before me.  They had jellies, to be sure,
with the arms of the Albizzi and the Acciajoli raised on them in all
colours; they've not turned the world quite upside down yet.  But all
their talk is, that we are to go back to the old ways: for up starts
Francesco Valori, that I've danced with in the Via Larga when he was a
bachelor and as fond of the Medici as anybody, and he makes a speech
about the old times, before the Florentines had left off crying `Popolo'
and begun to cry `Palle'--as if that had anything to do with a
wedding!--and how we ought to keep to the rules the Signory laid down
heaven knows when, that we were not to wear this and that, and not to
eat this and that--and how our manners were corrupted and we read bad
books; though he can't say that of _me_--"

"Stop, cousin!" said Bardo, in his imperious tone, for he had a remark
to make, and only desperate measures could arrest the rattling
lengthiness of Monna Brigida's discourse.  But now she gave a little
start, pursed up her mouth, and looked at him with round eyes.

"Francesco Valori is not altogether wrong," Bardo went on.  "Bernardo,
indeed, rates him not highly, and is rather of opinion that he christens
private grudges by the name of public zeal; though I must admit that my
good Bernardo is too slow of belief in that unalloyed patriotism which
was found in all its lustre amongst the ancients.  But it is true, Tito,
that our manners have degenerated somewhat from that noble frugality
which, as has been well seen in the public acts of our citizens, is the
parent of true magnificence.  For men, as I hear, will now spend on the
transient show of a Giostra sums which would suffice to found a library,
and confer a lasting possession on mankind.  Still, I conceive, it
remains true of us Florentines that we have more of that magnanimous
sobriety which abhors a trivial lavishness that it may be grandly
open-handed on grand occasions, than can be found in any other city of
Italy; for I understand that the Neapolitan and Milanese courtiers laugh
at the scarcity of our plate, and think scorn of our great families for
borrowing from each other that furniture of the table at their
entertainments.  But in the vain laughter of folly wisdom hears half its
applause."

"Laughter, indeed!" burst forth Monna Brigida again, the moment, Bardo
paused.  "If anybody wanted to hear laughter at the wedding to-day they
were disappointed, for when young Niccolo Macchiavelli tried to make a
joke, and told stories out of Franco Sacchetti's book, how it was no use
for the Signoria to make rules for us women, because we were cleverer
than all the painters, and architects, and doctors of logic in the
world, for we could make black look white, and yellow look pink, and
crooked look straight, and, if anything was forbidden, we could find a
new name for it--Holy Virgin! the Piagnoni looked more dismal than
before, and somebody said Sacchetti's book was wicked.  Well, I don't
read it--they can't accuse _me_ of reading anything.  Save me from going
to a wedding again, if that's to be the fashion; for all of us who were
not Piagnoni were as comfortable as wet chickens.  I was never caught in
a worse trap but once before, and that was when I went to hear their
precious Frate last Quaresima in San Lorenzo.  Perhaps I never told you
about it, Messer Tito?--it almost freezes my blood when I think of it.
How he rated us poor women! and the men, too, to tell the truth, but I
didn't mind that so much.  He called us cows, and lumps of flesh, and
wantons, and mischief-makers--and I could just bear that, for there were
plenty others more fleshy and spiteful than I was, though every now and
then his voice shook the very bench under me like a trumpet; but then he
came to the false hair, and, O misericordia! he made a picture--I see it
now--of a young woman lying a pale corpse, and us light-minded widows--
of course he meant me as well as the rest, for I had my plaits on, for
if one is getting old, one doesn't want to look as ugly as the Befana,
[Note 1]--us widows rushing up to the corpse, like bare-pated vultures
as we were, and cutting off its young dead hair to deck our old heads
with.  Oh, the dreams I had after that!  And then he cried, and wrung
his hands at us, and I cried too.  And to go home, and to take off my
jewels, this very clasp, and everything, and to make them into a packet,
_fu tutt'uno_; and I was within a hair of sending them to the Good Men
of Saint Martin to give to the poor, but, by heaven's mercy, I bethought
me of going first to my confessor, Fra Cristoforo, at Santa Croce, and
he told me how it was all the work of the devil, this preaching and
prophesying of their Fra Girolamo, and the Dominicans were trying to
turn the world upside down, and I was never to go and hear him again,
else I must do penance for it; for the great preachers Fra Mariano and
Fra Menico had shown how Fra Girolamo preached lies--and that was true,
for I heard them both in the Duomo--and how the Pope's dream of San
Francesco propping up the Church with his arms was being fulfilled
still, and the Dominicans were beginning to pull it down.  Well and
good: I went away _con Dio_, and made myself easy.  I am not going to be
frightened by a Frate Predicatore again.  And all I say is, I wish it
hadn't been the Dominicans that poor Dino joined years ago, for then I
should have been glad when I heard them say he was come back--"

"Silenzio!" said Bardo, in a loud agitated voice, while Romola half
started from her chair, clasped her hands, and looked round at Tito, as
if now she might appeal to him.  Monna Brigida gave a little scream, and
bit her lip.

"Donna!" said Bardo, again, "hear once more my will.  Bring no reports
about that name to this house; and thou, Romola, I forbid thee to ask.
My son is dead."

Bardo's whole frame seemed vibrating with passion, and no one dared to
break silence again.  Monna Brigida lifted her shoulders and her hands
in mute dismay; then she rose as quietly as possible, gave many
significant nods to Tito and Romola, motioning to them that they were
not to move, and stole out of the room like a culpable fat spaniel who
has barked unseasonably.

Meanwhile, Tito's quick mind had been combining ideas with
lightning-like rapidity.  Bardo's son was not really dead, then, as he
had supposed: he was a monk; he was "come back:" and Fra Luca--yes! it
was the likeness to Bardo and Romola that had made the face seem
half-known to him.  If he were only dead at Fiesole at that moment!
This importunate selfish wish inevitably thrust itself before every
other thought.  It was true that Bardo's rigid will was a sufficient
safeguard against any intercourse between Romola and her brother; but
_not_ against the betrayal of what he knew to others, especially when
the subject was suggested by the coupling of Romola's name with that of
the very Tito Melema whose description he had carried round his neck as
an index.  No! nothing but Fra Luca's death could remove all danger; but
his death was highly probable, and after the momentary shock of the
discovery, Tito let his mind fall back in repose on that confident hope.

They had sat in silence, and in a deepening twilight for many minutes,
when Romola ventured to say--

"Shall I light the lamp, father, and shall we go on?"

"No, my Romola, we will work no more to-night.  Tito, come and sit by me
here."

Tito moved from the reading-desk, and seated himself on the other side
of Bardo, close to his left elbow.

"Come nearer to me, figliuola mia," said Bardo again, after a moment's
pause.  And Romola seated herself on a low stool and let her arm rest on
her father's right knee, that he might lay his hand on her hair, as he
was fond of doing.

"Tito, I never told you that I had once a son," said Bardo, forgetting
what had fallen from him in the emotion raised by their first interview.
The old man had been deeply shaken, and was forced to pour out his
feelings in spite of pride.  "But he left me--he is dead to me.  I have
disowned him for ever.  He was a ready scholar as you are, but more
fervid and impatient, and yet sometimes rapt and self-absorbed, like a
flame fed by some fitful source; showing a disposition from the very
first to turn away his eyes from the clear lights of reason and
philosophy, and to prostrate himself under the influences of a dim
mysticism which eludes all rules of human duty as it eludes all
argument.  And so it ended.  We will speak no more of him: he is dead to
me.  I wish his face could be blotted from that world of memory in which
the distant seems to grow clearer and the near to fade."

Bardo paused, but neither Romola nor Tito dared to speak--his voice was
too tremulous, the poise of his feelings too doubtful.  But he presently
raised his hand and found Tito's shoulder to rest it on, while he went
on speaking, with an effort to be calmer.

"But _you_ have come to me, Tito--not quite too late.  I will lose no
time in vain regret.  When you are working by my side I seem to have
found a son again."

The old man, preoccupied with the governing interest of his life, was
only thinking of the much-meditated book which had quite thrust into the
background the suggestion, raised by Bernardo del Nero's warning, of a
possible marriage between Tito and Romola.  But Tito could not allow the
moment to pass unused.

"Will you let me be always and altogether your son?  Will you let me
take care of Romola--be her husband?  I think she will not deny me.  She
has said she loves me.  I know I am not equal to her in birth--in
anything; but I am no longer a destitute stranger."

"Is it true, my Romola?" said Bardo, in a lower tone, an evident
vibration passing through him and dissipating the saddened aspect of his
features.

"Yes, father," said Romola, firmly.  "I love Tito--I wish to marry him,
that we may both be your children and never part."

Tito's hand met hers in a strong clasp for the first time, while she was
speaking, but their eyes were fixed anxiously on her father.

"Why should it not be?" said Bardo, as if arguing against any opposition
to his assent, rather than assenting.  "It would be a happiness to me;
and thou, too, Romola, wouldst be the happier for it."

He stroked her long hair gently and bent towards her.

"Ah, I have been apt to forget that thou needest some other love than
mine.  And thou wilt be a noble wife.  Bernardo thinks I shall hardly
find a husband fitting for thee.  And he is perhaps right.  For thou art
not like the herd of thy sex: thou art such a woman as the immortal
poets had a vision of when they sang the lives of the heroes--tender but
strong, like thy voice, which has been to me instead of the light in the
years of my blindness...  And so thou lovest him?"

He sat upright again for a minute, and then said, in the same tone as
before, "Why should it not be?  I will think of it; I will talk with
Bernardo."

Tito felt a disagreeable chill at this answer, for Bernardo del Nero's
eyes had retained their keen suspicion whenever they looked at him, and
the uneasy remembrance of Fra Luca converted all uncertainty into fear.

"Speak for me, Romola," he said, pleadingly.  "Messer Bernardo is sure
to be against me."

"No, Tito," said Romola, "my godfather will not oppose what my father
firmly wills.  And it is your will that I should marry Tito--is it not
true, father?  Nothing has ever come to me before that I have wished for
strongly: I did not think it possible that I could care so much for
anything that could happen to myself."

It was a brief and simple plea; but it was the condensed story of
Romola's self-repressing colourless young life, which had thrown all its
passion into sympathy with aged sorrows, aged ambition, aged pride and
indignation.  It had never occurred to Romola that she should not speak
as directly and emphatically of her love for Tito as of any other
subject.

"Romola mia!" said her father fondly, pausing on the words, "it is true
thou hast never urged on me any wishes of thy own.  And I have no will
to resist thine; rather, my heart met Tito's entreaty at its very first
utterance.  Nevertheless, I must talk with Bernardo about the measures
needful to be observed.  For we must not act in haste, or do anything
unbeseeming my name.  I am poor, and held of little account by the
wealthy of our family--nay, I may consider myself a lonely man--but I
must nevertheless remember that generous birth has its obligations.  And
I would not be reproached by my fellow-citizens for rash haste in
bestowing my daughter.  Bartolommeo Scala gave his Alessandra to the
Greek Marullo, but Marullo's lineage was well-known, and Scala himself
is of no extraction.  I know Bernardo will hold that we must take time:
he will, perhaps, reproach me with want of due forethought.  Be patient,
my children: you are very young."

No more could be said, and Romola's heart was perfectly satisfied.  Not
so Tito's.  If the subtle mixture of good and evil prepares suffering
for human truth and purity, there is also suffering prepared for the
wrong-doer by the same mingled conditions.  As Tito kissed Romola on
their parting that evening, the very strength of the thrill that moved
his whole being at the sense that this woman, whose beauty it was hardly
possible to think of as anything but the necessary consequence of her
noble nature, loved him with all the tenderness that spoke in her clear
eyes, brought a strong reaction of regret that he had not kept himself
free from that first deceit which had dragged him into the danger of
being disgraced before her.  There was a spring of bitterness mingling
with that fountain of sweets.  Would the death of Fra Luca arrest it?
He hoped it would.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Note 1.  The name given to the grotesque black-faced figures, supposed
to represent the Magi, carried about or placed in the windows on Twelfth
Night: a corruption of Epifania.



CHAPTER THIRTEEN.

THE SHADOW OF NEMESIS.

It was the lazy afternoon time on the seventh of September, more than
two months after the day on which Romola and Tito had confessed their
love to each other.

Tito, just descended into Nello's shop, had found the barber stretched
on the bench with his cap over his eyes; one leg was drawn up, and the
other had slipped towards the ground, having apparently carried with it
a manuscript volume of verse, which lay with its leaves crushed.  In a
corner sat Sandro, playing a game at _mora_ by himself, and watching the
slow reply of his left fingers to the arithmetical demands of his right
with solemn-eyed interest.

Treading with the gentlest step, Tito snatched up the lute, and bending
over the barber, touched the strings lightly while he sang--

  "Quant' e bella giovinezza,
  Che si fugge tuttavia!
  Chi vuol esser lieto sia,
  Di doman non c'e certezza."

[Note 1.]

Nello was as easily awaked as a bird.  The cap was off his eyes in an
instant, and he started up.

"Ah, my Apollino!  I am somewhat late with my siesta on this hot day, it
seems.  That comes of not going to sleep in the natural way, but taking
a potion of potent poesy.  Hear you, how I am beginning to match my
words by the initial letter, like a Trovatore?  That is one of my bad
symptoms: I am sorely afraid that the good wine of my understanding is
going to run off at the spigot of authorship, and I shall be left an
empty cask with an odour of dregs, like many another incomparable genius
of my acquaintance.  What is it, my Orpheus?" here Nello stretched out
his arms to their full length, and then brought them round till his
hands grasped Tito's curls, and drew them out playfully.  "What is it
you want of your well-tamed Nello?  For I perceive a coaxing sound in
that soft strain of yours.  Let me see the very needle's eye of your
desire, as the sublime poet says, that I may thread it."

"That is but a tailor's image of your sublime poet's," said Tito, still
letting his fingers fall in a light dropping way on the strings.  "But
you have divined the reason of my affectionate impatience to see your
eyes open.  I want, you to give me an extra touch of your art--not on my
chin, no; but on the zazzera, which is as tangled as your Florentine
politics.  You have an adroit way of inserting your comb, which flatters
the skin, and stirs the animal spirits agreeably in that region; and a
little of your most delicate orange-scent would not lie amiss, for I am
bound to the Scala palace, and am to present myself in radiant company.
The young cardinal Giovanni de' Medici is to be there, and he brings
with him a certain young Bernardo Dovizi of Bibbiena, whose wit is so
rapid that I see no way of out-rivalling it save by the scent of
orange-blossoms."

Nello had already seized and flourished his comb, and pushed Tito gently
backward into the chair, wrapping the cloth round him.

"Never talk of rivalry, bel giovane mio: Bernardo Dovizi is a keen
youngster, who will never carry a net out to catch the wind; but he has
something of the same sharp-muzzled look as his brother Ser Piero, the
weasel that Piero de' Medici keeps at his beck to slip through small
holes for him.  No! you distance all rivals, and may soon touch the sky
with your forefinger.  They tell me you have even carried enough honey
with you to sweeten the sour Messer Angelo; for he has pronounced you
less of an ass than might have been expected, considering there is such
a good understanding between you and the Secretary."

"And between ourselves, Nello mio, that Messer Angelo has more genius
and erudition than I can find in all the other Florentine scholars put
together.  It may answer very well for them to cry me up now, when
Poliziano is beaten down with grief, or illness, or something else; I
can try a flight with such a sparrow-hawk as Pietro Crinito, but for
Poliziano, he is a large-beaked eagle who would swallow me, feathers and
all, and not feel any difference."

"I will not contradict your modesty there, if you will have it so; but
you don't expect us clever Florentines to keep saying the same things
over again every day of our lives, as we must do if we always told the
truth.  We cry down Dante, and we cry up Francesco Cei, just for the
sake of variety; and if we cry you up as a new Poliziano, heaven has
taken care that it shall not be quite so great a lie as it might have
been.  And are you not a pattern of virtue in this wicked city? with
your ears double-waxed against all siren invitations that would lure you
from the Via de' Bardi, and the great work which is to astonish
posterity?"

"Posterity in good truth, whom it will probably astonish as the universe
does, by the impossibility of seeing what was the plan of it."

"Yes, something like that was being prophesied here the other day.
Cristoforo Landino said that the excellent Bardo was one of those
scholars who lie overthrown in their learning, like cavaliers in heavy
armour, and then get angry because they are over-ridden--which pithy
remark, it seems to me, was not a herb out of his own garden; for of all
men, for feeding one with an empty spoon and gagging one with vain
expectation by long discourse, Messer Cristoforo is the pearl.  Ecco!
you are perfect now."  Here Nello drew away the cloth.  "Impossible to
add a grace more!  But love is not always to be fed on learning, eh?  I
shall have to dress the zazzera for the betrothal before long--is it not
true?"

"Perhaps," said Tito, smiling, "unless Messer Bernardo should next
recommend Bardo to require that I should yoke a lion and a wild boar to
the car of the Zecca before I can win my Alcestis.  But I confess he is
right in holding me unworthy of Romola; she is a Pleiad that may grow
dim by marrying any mortal."

"_Gnaffe_, your modesty is in the right place there.  Yet fate seems to
have measured and chiselled you for the niche that was left empty by the
old man's son, who, by the way, Cronaca was telling me, is now at San
Marco.  Did you know?"

A slight electric shock passed through Tito as he rose from the chair,
but it was not outwardly perceptible, for he immediately stooped to pick
up the fallen book, and busied his fingers with flattening the leaves,
while he said--

"No; he was at Fiesole, I thought.  Are you sure he is come back to San
Marco?"

"Cronaca is my authority," said Nello, with a shrug.  "I don't frequent
that sanctuary, but he does.  Ah," he added, taking the book from Tito's
hands, "my poor Nencia da Barberino!  It jars your scholarly feelings to
see the pages dog's-eared.  I was lulled to sleep by the well-rhymed
charms of that rustic maiden--`prettier than the turnip-flower,' `with a
cheek more savoury than cheese.'  But to get such a well-scented notion
of the contadina, one must lie on velvet cushions in the Via Larga--not
go to look at the Fierucoloni stumping in to the Piazza della Nunziata
this evening after sundown."

"And pray who are the Fierucoloni?" said Tito, indifferently, settling
his cap.

"The contadine who came from the mountains of Pistoia, and the
Casentino, and heaven knows where, to keep their vigil in the church of
the Nunziata, and sell their yarn and dried mushrooms at the Fierucola
[the little Fair], as we call it.  They make a queer show, with their
paper lanterns, howling their hymns to the Virgin on this eve of her
nativity--if you had the leisure to see them.  No?--well, I have had
enough of it myself, for there is wild work in the Piazza.  One may
happen to get a stone or two about one's ears or shins without asking
for it, and I was never fond of that pressing attention.  Addio."

Tito carried a little uneasiness with him on his visit, which ended
earlier than he had expected, the boy-cardinal Giovanni de' Medici,
youngest of red-hatted fathers, who has since presented his broad dark
cheek very conspicuously to posterity as Pope Leo the Tenth, having been
detained at his favourite pastime of the chase, and having failed to
appear.  It still wanted half an hour of sunset as he left the door of
the Scala palace, with the intention of proceeding forthwith to the Via
de' Bardi; but he had not gone far when, to his astonishment, he saw
Romola advancing towards him along the Borgo Pinti.

She wore a thick black veil and black mantle, but it was impossible to
mistake her figure and her walk; and by her side was a short stout form,
which he recognised as that of Monna Brigida, in spite of the unusual
plainness of her attire.  Romola had not been bred up to devotional
observances, and the occasions on which she took the air elsewhere than
under the loggia on the roof of the house, were so rare and so much
dwelt on beforehand, because of Bardo's dislike to be left without her,
that Tito felt sure there must have been some sudden and urgent ground
for an absence of which he had heard nothing the day before.  She saw
him through her veil and hastened her steps.

"Romola, has anything happened?" said Tito, turning to walk by her side.

She did not answer at the first moment, and Monna Brigida broke in.

"Ah, Messer Tito, you do well to turn round, for we are in haste.  And
is it not a misfortune?--we are obliged to go round by the walls and
turn up the Via del Maglio, because of the Fair; for the contadine
coming in block up the way by the Nunziata, which would have taken us to
San Marco in half the time."

Tito's heart gave a great bound, and began to beat violently.

"Romola," he said, in a lower tone, "are you going to San Marco?"

They were now out of the Borgo Pinti and were under the city walls,
where they had wide gardens on their left-hand, and all was quiet.
Romola put aside her veil for the sake of breathing the air, and he
could see the subdued agitation in her face.

"Yes, Tito mio," she said, looking directly at him with sad eyes.  "For
the first time I am doing something unknown to my father.  It comforts
me that I have met you, for at least I can tell _you_.  But if you are
going to him, it will be well for you not to say that you met me.  He
thinks I am only gone to my cousin, because she sent for me.  I left my
godfather with him: _he_ knows where I am going, and why.  You remember
that evening when my brother's name was mentioned and my father spoke of
him to you?"

"Yes," said Tito, in a low tone.  There was a strange complication in
his mental state.  His heart sank at the probability that a great change
was coming over his prospects, while at the same time his thoughts were
darting over a hundred details of the course he would take when the
change had come; and yet he returned Romola's gaze with a hungry sense
that it might be the last time she would ever bend it on him with full
unquestioning confidence.

"The _cugina_ had heard that he was come back, and the evening before--
the evening of San Giovanni--as I afterwards found, he had been seen by
our good Maso near the door of our house; but when Maso went to inquire
at San Marco, Dino, that is, my brother--he was christened Bernardino,
after our godfather, but now he calls himself Fra Luca--had been taken
to the monastery at Fiesole, because he was ill.  But this morning a
message came to Maso, saying that he was come back to San Marco, and
Maso went to him there.  He is very ill, and he has adjured me to go and
see him.  I cannot refuse it, though I hold him guilty; I still remember
how I loved him when I was a little girl, before I knew that he would
forsake my father.  And perhaps he has some word of penitence to send by
me.  It cost me a struggle to act in opposition to my father's feeling,
which I have always held to be just.  I am almost sure you will think I
have chosen rightly, Tito, because I have noticed that your nature is
less rigid than mine, and nothing makes you angry: it would cost, you
less to be forgiving; though, if you had seen your father forsaken by
one to whom he had given his chief love--by one in whom he had planted
his labour and his hopes--forsaken when his need was becoming greatest--
even you, Tito, would find it hard to forgive."

What could he say?  He was not equal to the hypocrisy of telling Romola
that such offences ought not to be pardoned; and he had not the courage
to utter any words of dissuasion.

"You are right, my Romola; you are always right, except in thinking too
well of me."

There was really some genuineness in those last words, and Tito looked
very beautiful as he uttered them, with an unusual pallor in his face,
and a slight quivering of his lip.  Romola, interpreting all things
largely, like a mind prepossessed with high beliefs, had a tearful
brightness in her eyes as she looked at him, touched with keen joy that
he felt so strongly whatever she felt.  But without pausing in her walk,
she said--

"And now, Tito, I wish you to leave me, for the _cugina_ and I shall be
less noticed if we enter the piazza alone."

"Yes, it were better you should leave us," said Monna Brigida; "for to
say the truth, Messer Tito, all eyes follow you, and let Romola muffle
herself as she will, every one wants to see what there is under her
veil, for she has that way of walking like a procession.  Not that I
find fault with her for it, only it doesn't suit my steps.  And, indeed,
I would rather not have us seen going to San Marco, and that's why I am
dressed as if I were one of the Piagnoni themselves, and as old as Sant'
Anna; for if it had been anybody but poor Dino, who ought to be forgiven
if he's dying, for what's the use of having a grudge against dead
people?--make them feel while they live, say I--"

No one made a scruple of interrupting Monna Brigida, and Tito, having
just raised Romola's hand to his lips, and said, "I understand, I obey
you," now turned away, lifting his cap--a sign of reverence rarely made
at that time by native Florentines, and which excited Bernardo del
Nero's contempt for Tito as a fawning Greek, while to Romola, who loved
homage, it gave him an exceptional grace.

He was half glad of the dismissal, half disposed to cling to Romola to
the last moment in which she would love him without suspicion.  For it
seemed to him certain that this brother would before all things want to
know, and that Romola would before all things confide to him, what was
her father's position and her own after the years which must have
brought so much change.  She would tell him that she was soon to be
publicly betrothed to a young scholar, who was to fill up the place left
vacant long ago by a wandering son.  He foresaw the impulse that would
prompt Romola to dwell on that prospect, and what would follow on the
mention of the future husband's name.  Fra Luca would tell all he knew
and conjectured, and Tito saw no possible falsity by which he could now
ward off the worst consequences of his former dissimulation.  It was all
over with his prospects in Florence.  There was Messer Bernardo del
Nero, who would be delighted at seeing confirmed the wisdom of his
advice about deferring the betrothal until Tito's character and position
had been established by a longer residence; and the history of the young
Greek professor, whose benefactor was in slavery, would be the talk
under every loggia.  For the first time in his life he felt too fevered
and agitated to trust his power of self-command; he gave up his intended
visit to Bardo, and walked up and down under the walls until the yellow
light in the west had quite faded, when, without any distinct purpose,
he took the first turning, which happened to be the Via San Sebastiano,
leading him directly towards the Piazza dell' Annunziata.

He was at one of those lawless moments which come to us all if we have
no guide but desire, and if the pathway where desire leads us seems
suddenly closed; he was ready to follow any beckoning that offered him
an immediate purpose.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Note 1.

  "Beauteous is life in blossom!
  And it fleeteth--fleeteth ever;
  Whoso would be joyful--let him!
  There's no surety for the morrow."

  _Carnival Song by Lorenzo de' Medici_.



CHAPTER FOURTEEN.

THE PEASANTS' FAIR.

The moving crowd and the strange mixture of noises that burst on him at
the entrance of the piazza, reminded Tito of what Nello had said to him
about the Fierucoloni, and he pushed his way into the crowd with a sort
of pleasure in the hooting and elbowing, which filled the empty moments,
and dulled that calculation of the future which had so new a dreariness
for him, as he foresaw himself wandering away solitary in pursuit of
some unknown fortune, that his thought had even glanced towards going in
search of Baldassarre after all.

At each of the opposite inlets he saw people struggling into the piazza,
while above them paper lanterns, held aloft on sticks, were waving
uncertainly to and fro.  A rude monotonous chant made a distinctly
traceable strand of noise, across which screams, whistles, gibing chants
in piping boyish voices, the beating of drums, and the ringing of little
bells, met each other in confused din.  Every now and then one of the
dim floating lights disappeared with a smash from a stone launched more
or less vaguely in pursuit of mischief, followed by a scream and renewed
shouts.  But on the outskirts of the whirling tumult there were groups
who were keeping this vigil of the Nativity of the Virgin in a more
methodical manner than by fitful stone-throwing and gibing.  Certain
ragged men, darting a hard sharp glance around them while their tongues
rattled merrily, were inviting country people to game with them on fair
and open-handed terms; two masquerading figures on stilts, who had
snatched lanterns from the crowd, were swaying the lights to and fro in
meteoric fashion, as they strode hither and thither; a sage trader was
doing a profitable business at a small covered stall, in hot
_berlingozzi_, a favourite farinaceous delicacy; one man standing on a
barrel, with his back firmly planted against a pillar of the loggia in
front of the Foundling Hospital (Spedale degl' Innocenti), was selling
efficacious pills, invented by a doctor of Salerno, warranted to prevent
toothache and death by drowning; and not far off, against another
pillar, a tumbler was showing off his tricks on a small platform; while
a handful of 'prentices, despising the slack entertainment of guerilla
stone-throwing, were having a private concentrated match of that
favourite Florentine sport at the narrow entrance of the Via de'
Febbrai.

Tito, obliged to make his way through chance openings in the crowd,
found himself at one moment close to the trotting procession of
barefooted, hard-heeled contadine, and could see their sun-dried,
bronzed faces, and their strange, fragmentary garb, dim with hereditary
dirt, and of obsolete stuffs and fashions, that made them look, in the
eyes of the city people, like a way-worn ancestry returning from a
pilgrimage on which they had set out a century ago.  Just then it was
the hardy, scant-feeding peasant-women from the mountains of Pistoia,
who wore entering with a year's labour in a moderate bundle of yarn on
their backs, and in their hearts that meagre hope of good and that wide
dim fear of harm, which were somehow to be cared for by the Blessed
Virgin, whose miraculous image, painted by the angels, was to have the
curtain drawn away from it on this Eve of her Nativity, that its potency
might stream forth without obstruction.

At another moment he was forced away towards the boundary of the piazza,
where the more stationary candidates for attention and small coin had
judiciously placed themselves, in order to be safe in their rear.  Among
these Tito recognised his acquaintance Bratti, who stood with his back
against a pillar, and his mouth pursed up in disdainful silence, eyeing
every one who approached him with a cold glance of superiority, and
keeping his hand fast on a serge covering which concealed the contents
of the basket slung before him.  Rather surprised at a deportment so
unusual in an anxious trader, Tito went nearer and saw two women go up
to Bratti's basket with a look of curiosity, whereupon the pedlar drew
the covering tighter, and looked another way.  It was quite too
provoking, and one of the women was fain to ask what there was in his
basket?

"Before I answer that, Monna, I must know whether you mean to buy.  I
can't show such wares as mine in this fair for every fly to settle on
and pay nothing.  My goods are a little too choice for that.  Besides,
I've only two left, and I've no mind to soil them; for with the chances
of the pestilence that wise men talk of, there is likelihood of their
being worth their weight in gold.  No, no: _andate con Dio_."

The two women looked at each other.

"And what may be the price?" said the second.

"Not within what you are likely to have in your purse, buona donna,"
said Bratti, in a compassionately supercilious tone.  "I recommend you
to trust in Messer Domeneddio and the saints: poor people can do no
better for themselves."

"Not so poor!" said the second woman, indignantly, drawing out her
money-bag.  "Come, now! what do you say to a grosso?"

"I say you may get twenty-one quattrini for it," said Bratti, coolly;
"but not of me, for I haven't got that small change."

"Come; two, then?" said the woman, getting exasperated, while her
companion looked at her with some envy.  "It will hardly be above two, I
think."

After further bidding, and further mercantile coquetry, Bratti put on an
air of concession.

"Since you've set your mind on it," he said, slowly raising the cover,
"I should be loth to do you a mischief; for Maestro Gabbadeo used to
say, when a woman sets her mind on a thing and doesn't get it, she's in
worse danger of the pestilence than before.  Ecco!  I have but two left;
and let me tell you, the fellow to them is on the finger of Maestro
Gabbadeo, who is gone to Bologna--as wise a doctor as sits at any door."

The precious objects were two clumsy iron rings, beaten into the fashion
of old Roman rings, such as were sometimes disinterred.  The rust on
them, and the entirely hidden character of their potency, were so
satisfactory, that the grossi were paid without grumbling, and the first
woman, destitute of those handsome coins, succeeded after much show of
reluctance on Bratti's part in driving a bargain with some of her yarn,
and carried off the remaining ring in triumph.  Bratti covered up his
basket, which was now filled with miscellanies, probably obtained under
the same sort of circumstances as the yarn, and, moving from his pillar,
came suddenly upon Tito, who, if he had had time, would have chosen to
avoid recognition.

"By the head of San Giovanni, now," said Bratti, drawing Tito back to
the pillar, "this is a piece of luck.  For I was talking of you this
morning, Messer Greco; but, I said, he is mounted up among the signori
now--and I'm glad of it, for I was at the bottom of his fortune--but I
can rarely get speech of him, for he's not to be caught lying on the
stones now--not he!  But it's your luck, not mine, Messer Greco, save
and except some small trifle to satisfy me for my trouble in the
transaction."

"You speak in riddles, Bratti," said Tito.  "Remember, I don't sharpen
my wits, as you do, by driving hard bargains for iron rings: you must be
plain."

"By the Holy 'Vangels! it was an easy bargain I gave them.  If a Hebrew
gets thirty-two per cent, I hope a Christian may get a little more.  If
I had not borne a conscience, I should have got twice the money and
twice the yarn.  But, talking of rings, it is your ring--that very ring
you've got on your finger--that I could get you a purchaser for; ay, and
a purchaser with a deep money-bag."

"Truly?" said Tito, looking at his ring and listening.

"A Genoese who is going straight away into Hungary, as I understand.  He
came and looked all over my shop to see if I had any old things I didn't
know the price of; I warrant you, he thought I had a pumpkin on my
shoulders.  He had been rummaging all the shops in Florence.  And he had
a ring on--not like yours, but something of the same fashion; and as he
was talking of rings, I said I knew a fine young man, a particular
acquaintance of mine, who had a ring of that sort.  And he said, `Who is
he, pray?  Tell him I'll give him his price for it.'  And I thought of
going after you to Nello's to-morrow; for it's my opinion of you, Messer
Greco, that you're not one who'd see the Arno run broth, and stand by
without dipping your finger."

Tito had lost no word of what Bratti had said, yet his mind had been
very busy all the while.  Why should he keep the ring?  It had been a
mere sentiment, a mere fancy, that had prevented him from selling it
with the other gems; if he had been wiser and had sold it, he might
perhaps have escaped that identification by Fra Luca.  It was true that
it had been taken from Baldassarre's finger and put on his own as soon
as his young hand had grown to the needful size; but there was really no
valid good to anybody in those superstitious scruples about inanimate
objects.  The ring had helped towards the recognition of him.  Tito had
begun to dislike recognition, which was a claim from the past.  This
foreigner's offer, if he would really give a good price, was an
opportunity for getting rid of the ring without the trouble of seeking a
purchaser.

"You speak with your usual wisdom, Bratti," said Tito.  "I have no
objection to hear what your Genoese will offer.  But when and where
shall I have speech of him?"

"To-morrow, at three hours after sunrise, he will be at my shop, and if
your wits are of that sharpness I have always taken them to be, Messer
Greco, you will ask him a heavy price; for he minds not money.  It's my
belief he's buying for somebody else, and not for himself--perhaps for
some great signor."

"It is well," said Tito.  "I will be at your shop, if nothing hinders."

"And you will doubtless deal nobly by me for old acquaintance' sake,
Messer Greco, so I will not stay to fix the small sum you will give me
in token of my service in the matter.  It seems to me a thousand years
now till I get out of the piazza, for a fair is a dull, not to say a
wicked thing, when one has no more goods to sell."

Tito made a hasty sign of assent and adieu, and moving away from the
pillar, again found himself pushed towards the middle of the piazza and
back again, without the power of determining his own course.  In this
zigzag way he was earned along to the end of the piazza opposite the
church, where, in a deep recess formed by an irregularity in the line of
houses, an entertainment was going forward which seemed to be especially
attractive to the crowd.  Loud bursts of laughter interrupted a
monologue which was sometimes slow and oratorical, at others rattling
and buffoonish.  Here a girl was being pushed forward into the inner
circle with apparent reluctance, and there a loud laughing minx was
finding a way with her own elbows.  It was a strange light that was
spread over the piazza.  There were the pale stars breaking out above,
and the dim waving lanterns below, leaving all objects indistinct except
when they were seen close under the fitfully moving lights; but in this
recess there was a stronger light, against which the heads of the
encircling spectators stood in dark relief as Tito was gradually pushed
towards them, while above them rose the head of a man wearing a white
mitre with yellow cabalistic figures upon it.

"Behold, my children!"  Tito heard him saying, "behold your opportunity!
neglect not the holy sacrament of matrimony when it can be had for the
small sum of a white quattrino--the cheapest matrimony ever offered, and
dissolved by special bull beforehand at every man's own will and
pleasure.  Behold the bull!"  Here the speaker held up a piece of
parchment with huge seals attached to it.  "Behold the indulgence
granted by his Holiness Alexander the Sixth, who, being newly elected
Pope for his peculiar piety, intends to reform and purify the Church,
and wisely begins by abolishing that priestly abuse which keeps too
large a share of this privileged matrimony to the clergy and stints the
laity.  Spit once, my sons, and pay a white quattrino!  This is the
whole and sole price of the indulgence.  The quattrino is the only
difference the Holy Father allows to be put any longer between us and
the clergy--who spit and pay nothing."

Tito thought he knew the voice, which had a peculiarly sharp ring, but
the face was too much in shadow from the lights behind for him to be
sure of the features.  Stepping as near as he could, he saw within the
circle behind the speaker an altar-like table raised on a small
platform, and covered with a red drapery stitched all over with yellow
cabalistical figures.  Half-a-dozen thin tapers burned at the back of
this table, which had a conjuring apparatus scattered over it, a large
open book in the centre, and at one of the front angles a monkey
fastened by a cord to a small ring and holding a small taper, which in
his incessant fidgety movements fell more or less aslant, whilst an
impish boy in a white surplice occupied himself chiefly in cuffing the
monkey, and adjusting the taper.  The man in the mitre also wore a
surplice, and over it a chasuble on which the signs of the zodiac were
rudely marked in black upon a yellow ground.  Tito was sure now that he
recognised the sharp upward-tending angles of the face under the mitre:
it was that of Maestro Vaiano, the mountebank, from whom he had rescued
Tessa.  Pretty little Tessa!  Perhaps she too had come in among the
troops of contadine.

"Come, my maidens!  This is the time for the pretty who can have many
chances, and for the ill-favoured who have few.  Matrimony to be had--
hot, eaten, and done with as easily as _berlingozzi_!  And see!" here
the conjuror held up a cluster of tiny bags.  "To every bride I give a
_Breve_ with a secret in it--the secret alone worth the money you pay
for the matrimony.  The secret how to--no, no, I will not tell you what
the secret is about, and that makes it a double secret.  Hang it round
your neck if you like, and never look at it; I don't say _that_ will not
be the best, for then you will see many things you don't expect: though
if you open it you may break your leg, _e vero_, but you will know a
secret!  Something nobody knows but me!  And mark--I give you the
_Breve_, I don't sell it, as many another holy man would: the quattrino
is for the matrimony, and the _Breve_ you get for nothing.  _Orsu,
giovanetti_, come like dutiful sons of the Church and buy the Indulgence
of his Holiness Alexander the Sixth."

This buffoonery just fitted the taste of the audience; the _fierucola_
was but a small occasion, so the townsmen might be contented with jokes
that were rather less indecent than those they were accustomed to hear
at every carnival, put into easy rhyme by the Magnifico and his poetic
satellites; while the women, over and above any relish of the fun,
really began to have an itch for the _Brevi_.  Several couples had
already gone through the ceremony, in which the conjuror's solemn
gibberish and grimaces over the open book, the antics of the monkey, and
even the preliminary spitting, had called forth peals of laughter; and
now a well-looking, merry-eyed youth of seventeen, in a loose tunic and
red cap, pushed forward, holding by the hand a plump brunette, whose
scanty ragged dress displayed her round arms and legs very
picturesquely.

"Fetter us without delay, Maestro!" said the youth, "for I have got to
take my bride home and paint her under the light of a lantern."

"Ha!  Mariotto, my son, I commend your pious observance..."  The
conjuror was going on, when a loud chattering behind warned him that an
unpleasant crisis had arisen with his monkey.

The temper of that imperfect acolyth was a little tried by the
over-active discipline of his colleague in the surplice, and a sudden
cuff administered as his taper fell to a horizontal position, caused him
to leap back with a violence that proved too much for the slackened knot
by which his cord was fastened.  His first leap was to the other end of
the table, from which position his remonstrances were so threatening
that the imp in the surplice took up a wand by way of an equivalent
threat, whereupon the monkey leaped on to the head of a tall woman in
the foreground, dropping his taper by the way, and chattering with
increased emphasis from that eminence.  Great was the screaming and
confusion, not a few of the spectators having a vague dread of the
Maestro's monkey, as capable of more hidden mischief than mere teeth and
claws could inflict; and the conjuror himself was in some alarm lest any
harm should happen to his familiar.  In the scuffle to seize the
monkey's string, Tito got out of the circle, and, not caring to contend
for his place again, he allowed himself to be gradually pushed towards
the church of the Nunziata, and to enter amongst the worshippers.

The brilliant illumination within seemed to press upon his eyes with
palpable force after the pale scattered lights and broad shadows of the
piazza, and for the first minute or two he could see nothing distinctly.
That yellow splendour was in itself something supernatural and heavenly
to many of the peasant-women, for whom half the sky was hidden by
mountains, and who went to bed in the twilight; and the uninterrupted
chant from the choir was repose to the ear after the hellish hubbub of
the crowd outside.  Gradually the scene became clearer, though still
there was a thin yellow haze from incense mingling with the breath of
the multitude.  In a chapel on the left-hand of the nave, wreathed with
silver lamps, was seen unveiled the miraculous fresco of the
Annunciation, which, in Tito's oblique view of it from the right-hand
side of the nave, seemed dark with the excess of light around it.  The
whole area of the great church was filled with peasant-women, some
kneeling, some standing; the coarse bronzed skins, and the dingy
clothing of the rougher dwellers on the mountains, contrasting with the
softer-lined faces and white or red head-drapery of the well-to-do
dwellers in the valley, who were scattered in irregular groups.  And
spreading high and far over the walls and ceiling there was another
multitude, also pressing close against each other, that they might be
nearer the potent Virgin.  It was the crowd of votive waxen images, the
effigies of great personages, clothed in their habit as they lived:
Florentines of high name in their black silk lucco, as when they sat in
council; popes, emperors, kings, cardinals, and famous condottieri with
plumed morion seated on their chargers; all notable strangers who passed
through Florence or had aught to do with its affairs--Mohammedans, even,
in well-tolerated companionship with Christian cavaliers; some of them
with faces blackened and robes tattered by the corroding breath of
centuries, others fresh and bright in new red mantle or steel corselet,
the exact doubles of the living.  And wedged in with all these were
detached arms, legs, and other members, with only here and there a gap
where some image had been removed for public disgrace, or had fallen
ominously, as Lorenzo's had done six months before.  It was a perfect
resurrection-swarm of remote mortals and fragments of mortals,
reflecting, in their varying degrees of freshness, the sombre dinginess
and sprinkled brightness of the crowd below.

Tito's glance wandered over the wild multitude in search of something.
He had already thought of Tessa, and the white hoods suggested the
possibility that he might detect her face under one of them.  It was at
least a thought to be courted, rather than the vision of Romola looking
at him with changed eyes.  But he searched in vain; and he was leaving
the church, weary of a scene which had no variety, when, just against
the doorway, he caught sight of Tessa, only two yards off him.  She was
kneeling with her back against the wall, behind a group of
peasant-women, who were standing and looking for a spot nearer to the
sacred image.  Her head hung a little aside with a look of weariness,
and her blue eyes were directed rather absently towards an altar-piece
where the Archangel Michael stood in his armour, with young face and
floating hair, amongst bearded and tonsured saints.  Her right-hand,
holding a bunch of cocoons, fell by her side listlessly, and her round
cheek was paled, either by the light or by the weariness that was
expressed in her attitude: her lips were pressed poutingly together, and
every now and then her eyelids half fell: she was a large image of a
sweet sleepy child.  Tito felt an irresistible desire to go up to her
and get her pretty trusting looks and prattle: this creature who was
without moral judgment that could condemn him, whose little loving
ignorant soul made a world apart, where he might feel in freedom from
suspicions and exacting demands, had a new attraction for him now.  She
seemed a refuge from the threatened isolation that would come with
disgrace.  He glanced cautiously round, to assure himself that Monna
Ghita was not near, and then, slipping quietly to her side, kneeled on
one knee, and said, in the softest voice, "Tessa!"

She hardly started, any more than she would have started at a soft
breeze that fanned her gently when she was needing it.  She turned her
head and saw Tito's face close to her: it was very much more beautiful
than the Archangel Michael's, who was so mighty and so good that he
lived with the Madonna and all the saints and was prayed to along with
them.  She smiled in happy silence, for that nearness of Tito quite
filled her mind.

"My little Tessa! you look very tired.  How long have you been kneeling
here?"

She seemed to be collecting her thoughts for a minute or two, and at
last she said--

"I'm very hungry."

"Come, then; come with me."

He lifted her from her knees, and led her out under the cloisters
surrounding the atrium, which were then open, and not yet adorned with
the frescoes of Andrea del Sarto.

"How is it you are all by yourself, and so hungry, Tessa?"

"The Madre is ill; she has very bad pains in her legs, and sent me to
bring these cocoons to the Santissima Nunziata, because they're so
wonderful; see!"--she held up the bunch of cocoons, which were arranged
with fortuitous regularity on a stem,--"and she had kept them to bring
them herself, but she couldn't, and so she sent me because she thinks
the Holy Madonna may take away her pains; and somebody took my bag with
the bread and chestnuts in it, and the people pushed me back, and I was
so frightened coming in the crowd, and I couldn't get anywhere near the
Holy Madonna, to give the cocoons to the Padre, but I must--oh, I must."

"Yes, my little Tessa, you shall take them; but first come and let me
give you some berlingozzi.  There are some to be had not far off."

"Where did you come from?" said Tessa, a little bewildered.  "I thought
you would never come to me again, because you never came to the Mercato
for milk any more.  I set myself Aves to say, to see if they would bring
you back, but I left off, because they didn't."

"You see I come when you want some one to take care of you, Tessa.
Perhaps the Aves fetched me, only it took them a long while.  But what
shall you do if you are here all alone?  Where shall you go?"

"Oh, I shall stay and sleep in the church--a great many of them do--in
the church and all about here--I did once when I came with my mother;
and the _patrigno_ is coming with the mules in the morning."

They were out in the piazza now, where the crowd was rather less riotous
than before, and the lights were fewer, the stream of pilgrims having
ceased.  Tessa clung fast to Tito's arm in satisfied silence, while he
led her towards the stall where he remembered seeing the eatables.
Their way was the easier because there was just now a great rush towards
the middle of the piazza, where the masqued figures on stilts had found
space to execute a dance.  It was very pretty to see the guileless thing
giving her cocoons into Tito's hand, and then eating her berlingozzi
with the relish of a hungry child.  Tito had really come to take care of
her, as he did before, and that wonderful happiness of being with him
had begun again for her.  Her hunger was soon appeased, all the sooner
for the new stimulus of happiness that had roused her from her languor,
and, as they turned away from the stall, she said nothing about going
into the church again, but looked round as if the sights in the piazza
were not without attraction to her now she was safe under Tito's arm.

"How can they do that?" she exclaimed, looking up at the dancers on
stilts.  Then, after a minute's silence, "Do you think Saint Christopher
helps them?"

"Perhaps.  What do you think about it, Tessa?" said Tito, slipping his
right arm round her, and looking down at her fondly.

"Because Saint Christopher is so very tall; and he is very good: if
anybody looks at him he takes care of them all day.  He is on the wall
of the church--too tall to stand up there--but I saw him walking through
the streets one San Giovanni, carrying the little Gesu."

"You pretty pigeon!  Do you think anybody could help taking care of
_you_, if you looked at them?"

"Shall you always come and take care of me?" said Tessa, turning her
face up to him, as he crushed her cheek with his left-hand.  "And shall
you always be a long while first?"

Tito was conscious that some bystanders were laughing at them, and
though the licence of street fun, among artists and young men of the
wealthier sort as well as among the populace, made few adventures
exceptional, still less disreputable, he chose to move away towards the
end of the piazza.

"Perhaps I shall come again to you very soon, Tessa," he answered,
rather dreamily, when they had moved away.  He was thinking that when
all the rest had turned their backs upon him, it would be pleasant to
have this little creature adoring him and nestling against him.  The
absence of presumptuous self-conceit in Tito made him feel all the more
defenceless under prospective obloquy: he needed soft looks and caresses
too much ever to be impudent.

"In the Mercato?" said Tessa.  "Not to-morrow morning, because the
_patrigno_ will be there, and he is so cross.  Oh! but you have money,
and he will not be cross if you buy some salad.  And there are some
chestnuts.  Do you like chestnuts?"

He said nothing, but continued to look down at her with a dreamy
gentleness, and Tessa felt herself in a state of delicious wonder;
everything seemed as new as if she were being earned on a chariot of
clouds.

"Holy Virgin!" she exclaimed again presently.  "There is a holy father
like the Bishop I saw at Prato."

Tito looked up too, and saw that he had unconsciously advanced to within
a few yards of the conjuror, Maestro Vaiano, who for the moment was
forsaken by the crowd.  His face was turned away from them, and he was
occupied with the apparatus on his altar or table, preparing a new
diversion by the time the interest in the dancing should be exhausted.
The monkey was imprisoned under the red cloth, out of reach of mischief,
and the youngster in the white surplice was holding a sort of dish or
salver, from which his master was taking some ingredient.  The
altar-like table, with its gorgeous cloth, the row of tapers, the sham
episcopal costume, the surpliced attendant, and even the movements of
the mitred figure, as he alternately bent his head and then raised
something before the lights, were a sufficiently near parody of sacred
things to rouse poor little Tessa's veneration; and there was some
additional awe produced by the mystery of their apparition in this spot,
for when she had seen an altar in the street before, it had been on
Corpus Christi Day, and there had been a procession to account for it.
She crossed herself and looked up at Tito, but then, as if she had had
time for reflection, said, "It is because of the Nativita."

Meanwhile Vaiano had turned round, raising his hands to his mitre with
the intention of changing his dress, when his quick eye recognised Tito
and Tessa who were both looking at him, their faces being shone upon by
the light of his tapers, while his own was in shadow.

"Ha! my children!" he said, instantly, stretching out his hands in a
benedictory attitude, "you are come to be married.  I commend your
penitence--the blessing of Holy Church can never come too late."

But whilst he was speaking, he had taken in the whole meaning of Tessa's
attitude and expression, and he discerned an opportunity for a new kind
of joke which required him to be cautious and solemn.

"Should you like to be married to me, Tessa?" said Tito, softly, half
enjoying the comedy, as he saw the pretty childish seriousness on her
face, half prompted by hazy previsions which belonged to the
intoxication of despair.

He felt her vibrating before she looked up at him and said, timidly,
"Will you let me?"

He answered only by a smile, and by leading her forward in front of the
_cerretano_, who, seeing an excellent jest in Tessa's evident delusion,
assumed a surpassing sacerdotal solemnity, and went through the mimic
ceremony with a liberal expenditure of _lingua furbesca_ or thieves'
Latin.  But some symptoms of a new movement in the crowd urged him to
bring it to a speedy conclusion and dismiss them with hands outstretched
in a benedictory attitude over their kneeling figures.  Tito, disposed
always to cultivate goodwill, though it might be the least select, put a
piece of four grossi into his hand as he moved away, and was thanked by
a look which, the conjuror felt sure, conveyed a perfect understanding
of the whole affair.

But Tito himself was very far from that understanding, and did not, in
fact, know whether, the next moment, he should tell Tessa of the joke
and laugh at her for a little goose, or whether he should let her
delusion last, and see what would come of it--see what she would say and
do next.

"Then you will not go away from me again," said Tessa, after they had
walked a few steps, "and you will take me to where you live."  She spoke
meditatively, and not in a questioning tone.  But presently she added,
"I must go back once to the Madre though, to tell her I brought the
cocoons, and that I am married, and shall not go back again."

Tito felt the necessity of speaking now; and in the rapid thought
prompted by that necessity, he saw that by undeceiving Tessa he should
be robbing himself of some at least of that pretty trustfulness which
might, by-and-by, be his only haven from contempt.  It would spoil Tessa
to make her the least particle wiser or more suspicious.

"Yes, my little Tessa," he said, caressingly, "you must go back to the
Madre; but you must not tell her you are married--you must keep that a
secret from everybody; else some very great harm would happen to me, and
you would never see me again."

She looked up at him with fear in her face.

"You must go back and feed your goats and mules, and do just as you have
always done before, and say no word to any one about me."

The corners of her mouth fell a little.

"And then, perhaps, I shall come and take care of you again when you
want me, as I did before.  But you must do just what I tell you, else
you will not see me again."

"Yes, I will, I will," she said, in a loud whisper, frightened at that
blank prospect.

They were silent a little while; and then Tessa, looking at her hand,
said--

"The Madre wears a betrothal ring.  She went to church and had it put
on, and then after that, an other day, she was married.  And so did the
cousin Nannina.  But then _she_ married Gollo," added the poor little
thing, entangled in the difficult comparison between her own ease and
others within her experience.

"But you must not wear a betrothal ring, my Tessa, because no one must
know you are married," said Tito, feeling some insistance necessary.
"And the _buona fortuna_ that I gave you did just as well for betrothal.
Some people are betrothed with rings and some are not."

"Yes, it is true, they would see the ring," said Tessa, trying to
convince herself that a thing she would like very much was really not
good for her.

They were now near the entrance of the church again, and she remembered
her cocoons which were still in Tito's hand.

"Ah, you must give me the _boto_," she said; "and we must go in, and I
must take it to the Padre, and I must tell the rest of my beads, because
I was too tired before."

"Yes, you must go in, Tessa; but I will not go in.  I must leave you
now," said Tito, too feverish and weary to re-enter that stifling heat,
and feeling that this was the least difficult way of parting with her.

"And not come back?  Oh, where do you go?"  Tessa's mind had never
formed an image of his whereabout or his doings when she did not see
him: he had vanished, and her thought, instead of following him, had
stayed in the same spot where he was with her.

"I shall come back some time, Tessa," said Tito, taking her under the
cloisters to the door of the church.  "You must not cry--you must go to
sleep, when you have said your beads.  And here is money to buy your
breakfast.  Now kiss me, and look happy, else I shall not come again."

She made a great effort over herself as she put up her lips to kiss him,
and submitted to be gently turned round, with her face towards the door
of the church.  Tito saw her enter; and then with a shrug at his own
resolution, leaned against a pillar, took off his cap, rubbed his hair
backward, and wondered where Romola was now, and what she was thinking
of him.  Poor little Tessa had disappeared behind the curtain among the
crowd of peasants; but the love which formed one web with all his
worldly hopes, with the ambitions and pleasures that must make the solid
part of his days--the love that was identified with his larger self--was
not to be banished from his consciousness.  Even to the man who presents
the most elastic resistance to whatever is unpleasant, there will come
moments when the pressure from without is too strong for him, and he
must feel the smart and the bruise in spite of himself.  Such a moment
had come to Tito.  There was no possible attitude of mind, no scheme of
action by which the uprooting of all his newly-planted hopes could be
made otherwise than painful.



CHAPTER FIFTEEN.

THE DYING MESSAGE.

When Romola arrived at the entrance of San Marco she found one of the
Frati waiting there in expectation of her arrival.  Monna Brigida
retired into the adjoining church, and Romola was conducted to the door
of the chapter-house in the outer cloister, whither the invalid had been
conveyed; no woman being allowed admission beyond this precinct.

When the door opened, the subdued external light blending with that of
two tapers placed behind a truckle-bed, showed the emaciated face of Fra
Luca, with the tonsured crown of golden hair above it, and with
deep-sunken hazel eyes fixed on a small crucifix which he held before
him.  He was propped up into nearly a sitting posture; and Romola was
just conscious, as she threw aside her veil, that there was another monk
standing by the bed, with the black cowl drawn over his head, and that
he moved towards the door as she entered; just conscious that in the
background there was a crucified form rising high and pale on the
frescoed wall, and pale faces of sorrow looking out from it below.

The next moment her eyes met Fra Luca's as they looked up at her from
the crucifix, and she was absorbed in that pang of recognition which
identified this monkish emaciated form with the image of her fair young
brother.

"Dino!" she said, in a voice like a low cry of pain.  But she did not
bend towards him; she held herself erect, and paused at two yards'
distance from him.  There was an unconquerable repulsion for her in that
monkish aspect; it seemed to her the brand of the dastardly
undutifulness which had left her father desolate--of the grovelling
superstition which could give such undutifulness the name of piety.  Her
father, whose proud sincerity and simplicity of life had made him one of
the few frank pagans of his time, had brought her up with a silent
ignoring of any claims the Church could have to regulate the belief and
action of beings with a cultivated reason.  The Church, in her mind,
belonged to that actual life of the mixed multitude from which they had
always lived apart, and she had no ideas that could render her brother's
course an object of any other feeling than incurious, indignant
contempt.  Yet the lovingness of Romola's soul had clung to that image
in the past, and while she stood rigidly aloof, there was a yearning
search in her eyes for something too faintly discernible.

But there was no corresponding emotion in the face of the monk.  He
looked at the little sister returned to him in her full womanly beauty,
with the far-off gaze of a revisiting spirit.

"My sister!" he said, with a feeble and interrupted but yet distinct
utterance, "it is well thou hast not longer delayed to come, for I have
a message to deliver to thee, and my time is short."

Romola took a step nearer: the message, she thought, would be one of
affectionate penitence to her father, and her heart began to open.
Nothing could wipe out the long years of desertion; but the culprit,
looking back on those years with the sense of irremediable wrong
committed, would call forth pity.  Now, at the last, there would be
understanding and forgiveness.  Dino would pour out some natural filial
feeling; he would ask questions about his father's blindness--how
rapidly it had come on? how the long dark days had been filled? what the
life was now in the home where he himself had been nourished?--and the
last message from the dying lips would be one of tenderness and regret.

"Romola," Fra Luca began, "I have had a vision concerning thee.  Thrice
I have had it in the last two months: each time it has been clearer.
Therefore I came from Fiesole, deeming it a message from heaven that I
was bound to deliver.  And I gather a promise of mercy to thee in this,
that my breath is preserved in order to--"

The difficult breathing which continually interrupted him would not let
him finish the sentence.

Romola had felt her heart chilling again.  It was a vision, then, this
message--one of those visions she had so often heard her father allude
to with bitterness.  Her indignation rushed to her lips.

"Dino, I thought you had some words to send to my father.  You forsook
him when his sight was failing; you made his life very desolate.  Have
you never cared about that? never repented?  What is this religion of
yours, that places visions before natural duties?"

The deep-sunken hazel eyes turned slowly towards her, and rested upon
her in silence for some moments, as if he were meditating whether he
should answer her.

"No," he said at last; speaking as before, in a low passionless tone, as
of some spirit not human, speaking through dying human organs.  "No; I
have never repented fleeing from the stifling poison-breath of sin that
was hot and thick around me, and threatened to steal over my senses like
besotting wine.  My father could not hear the voice that called me night
and day; he knew nothing of the demon-tempters that tried to drag me
back from following it.  My father has lived amidst human sin and misery
without believing in them: he has been like one busy picking shining
stones in a mine, while there was a world dying of plague above him.  I
spoke, but he listened with scorn.  I told him the studies he wished me
to live for were either childish trifling--dead toys--or else they must
be made warm and living by pulses that beat to worldly ambitions and
fleshly lusts, for worldly ambitions and fleshly lusts made all the
substance of the poetry and history he wanted me to bend my eyes on
continually."

"Has not my father led a pure and noble life, then?"  Romola burst
forth, unable to hear in silence this implied accusation against her
father.  "He has sought no worldly honours; he has been truthful; he has
denied himself all luxuries; he has lived like one of the ancient sages.
He never wished you to live for worldly ambitions and fleshly lusts; he
wished you to live as he himself has done, according to the purest
maxims of philosophy, in which he brought you up."

Romola spoke partly by rote, as all ardent and sympathetic young
creatures do; but she spoke with intense belief.  The pink flush was in
her face, and she quivered from head to foot.  Her brother was again
slow to answer; looking at her passionate face with strange passionless
eyes.

"What were the maxims of philosophy to me?  They told me to be strong,
when I felt myself weak; when I was ready, like the blessed Saint
Benedict, to roll myself among thorns, and court smarting wounds as a
deliverance from temptation.  For the Divine love had sought me, and
penetrated me, and created a great need in me; like a seed that wants
room to grow.  I had been brought up in carelessness of the true faith;
I had not studied the doctrines of our religion; but it seemed to take
possession of me like a rising flood.  I felt that there was a life of
perfect love and purity for the soul; in which there would be no uneasy
hunger after pleasure, no tormenting questions, no fear of suffering.
Before I knew the history of the saints, I had a foreshadowing of their
ecstasy.  For the same truth had penetrated even into pagan philosophy:
that it is a bliss within the reach of man to die to mortal needs, and
live in the life of God as the Unseen Perfectness.  But to attain that I
must forsake the world: I must have no affection, no hope, wedding me to
that which passeth away; I must live with my fellow-beings only as human
souls related to the eternal unseen life.  That need was urging me
continually: it came over me in visions when my mind fell away weary
from the vain words which record the passions of dead men: it came over
me after I had been tempted into sin and had turned away with loathing
from the scent of the emptied cup.  And in visions I saw the meaning of
the Crucifix."

He paused, breathing hard for a minute or two: but Romola was not
prompted to speak again.  It was useless for her mind to attempt any
contact with the mind of this unearthly brother: as useless as for her
hand to try and grasp a shadow.  When he spoke again his heaving chest
was quieter.

"I felt whom I must follow: but I saw that even among the servants of
the Cross who professed to have renounced the world, my soul would be
stifled with the fumes of hypocrisy, and lust, and pride.  God had not
chosen me, as he chose Saint Dominic and Saint Francis, to wrestle with
evil in the Church and in the world.  He called upon me to flee: I took
the sacred vows and I fled--fled to lands where danger and scorn and
want bore me continually, like angels, to repose on the bosom of God.  I
have lived the life of a hermit, I have ministered to pilgrims; but my
task has been short: the veil has worn very thin that divides me from my
everlasting rest.  I came back to Florence that--"

"Dino, you _did_ want to know if my father was alive," interrupted
Romola, the picture of that suffering life touching her again with the
desire for union and forgiveness.

"--That before I died I might urge others of our brethren to study the
Eastern tongues, as I had not done, and go out to greater ends than I
did; and I find them already bent on the work.  And since I came,
Romola, I have felt that I was sent partly to thee--not to renew the
bonds of earthly affection, but to deliver the heavenly warning conveyed
in a vision.  For I have had that vision thrice.  And through all the
years since first the Divine voice called me, while I was yet in the
world, I have been taught and guided by visions.  For in the painful
linking together of our waking thoughts we can never be sure that we
have not mingled our own error with the light we have prayed for; but in
visions and dreams we are passive, and our souls are as an instrument in
the Divine hand.  Therefore listen, and speak not again--for the time is
short."

Romola's mind recoiled strongly from listening to this vision.  Her
indignation had subsided, but it was only because she had felt the
distance between her brother and herself widening.  But while Fra Luca
was speaking, the figure of another monk had entered, and again stood on
the other side of the bed, with the cowl drawn over his head.

"Kneel, my daughter, for the Angel of Death is present, and waits while
the message of heaven is delivered: bend thy pride before it is bent for
thee by a yoke of iron," said a strong rich voice, startlingly in
contrast with Fra Luca's.

The tone was not that of imperious command, but of quiet self-possession
and assurance of the right, blended with benignity.  Romola, vibrating
to the sound, looked round at the figure on the opposite side of the
bed.  His face was hardly discernible under the shadow of the cowl, and
her eyes fell at once on his hands, which were folded across his breast
and lay in relief on the edge of his black mantle.  They had a marked
physiognomy which enforced the influence of the voice: they were very
beautiful and almost of transparent delicacy.  Romola's disposition to
rebel against command, doubly active in the presence of monks, whom she
had been taught to despise, would have fixed itself on any repulsive
detail as a point of support.  But the face was hidden, and the hands
seemed to have an appeal in them against all hardness.  The next moment
the right-hand took the crucifix to relieve the fatigued grasp of Fra
Luca, and the left touched his lips with a wet sponge which lay near.
In the act of bending, the cowl was pushed back, and the features of the
monk had the full light of the tapers on them.  They were very marked
features, such as lend themselves to popular description.  There was the
high arched nose, the prominent under-lip, the coronet of thick dark
hair above the brow, all seeming to tell of energy and passion; there
were the blue-grey eyes, shining mildly under auburn eyelashes, seeming,
like the hands, to tell of acute sensitiveness.  Romola felt certain
they were the features of Fra Girolamo Savonarola, the prior of San
Marco, whom she had chiefly thought of as more offensive than other
monks, because he was more noisy.  Her rebellion was rising against the
first impression, which had almost forced her to bend her knees.

"Kneel, my daughter," the penetrating voice said again, "the pride of
the body is a barrier against the gifts that purify the soul."

He was looking at her with mild fixedness while he spoke, and again she
felt that subtle mysterious influence of a personality by which it has
been given to some rare men to move their fellows.

Slowly Romola fell on her knees, and in the very act a tremor came over
her; in the renunciation of her proud erectness, her mental attitude
seemed changed, and she found herself in a new state of passiveness.
Her brother began to speak again--

"Romola, in the deep night, as I lay awake, I saw my father's room--the
library--with all the books and the marbles and the leggio, where I used
to stand and read; and I saw you--you were revealed to me as I see you
now, with fair long hair, sitting before my father's chair.  And at the
leggio stood a man whose face I could not see.  I looked, and looked,
and it was a blank to me, even as a painting effaced; and I saw him move
and take thee, Romola, by the hand; and then I saw thee take my father
by the hand; and you all three went down the stone steps into the
streets, the man whose face was a blank to me leading the way.  And you
stood at the altar in Santa Croce, and the priest who married you had
the face of death; and the graves opened, and the dead in their shrouds
rose and followed you like a bridal train.  And you passed on through
the streets and the gates into the valley, and it seemed to me that he
who led you hurried you more than you could bear, and the dead were
weary of following you, and turned back to their graves.  And at last
you came to a stony place where there was no water, and no trees or
herbage; but instead of water, I saw written parchment unrolling itself
everywhere, and instead of trees and herbage I saw men of bronze and
marble springing up and crowding round you.  And my father was faint for
want of water and fell to the ground; and the man whose face was a blank
loosed thy hand and departed: and as he went I could see his face; and
it was the face of the Great Tempter.  And thou, Romola, didst wring thy
hands and seek for water, and there was none.  And the bronze and marble
figures seemed to mock thee and hold out cups of water, and when thou
didst grasp them and put them to my father's lips, they turned to
parchment.  And the bronze and marble figures seemed to turn into demons
and snatch my father's body from thee, and the parchments shrivelled up,
and blood ran everywhere instead of them, and fire upon the blood, till
they all vanished, and the plain was bare and stony again, and thou wast
alone in the midst of it.  And then it seemed that the night fell and I
saw no more...  Thrice I have had that vision, Romola.  I believe it is
a revelation meant for thee: to warn thee against marriage as a
temptation of the enemy; it calls upon thee to dedicate thyself--"

His pauses had gradually become longer and more frequent, and he was now
compelled to cease by a severe fit of gasping, in which his eyes were
turned on the crucifix as on a light that was vanishing.  Presently he
found strength to speak again, but in a feebler, scarcely audible tone.

"To renounce the vain philosophy and corrupt thoughts of the heathens:
for in the hour of sorrow and death their pride will turn to mockery,
and the unclean gods will--"

The words died away.

In spite of the thought that was at work in Romola, telling her that
this vision was no more than a dream, fed by youthful memories and ideal
convictions, a strange awe had come over her.  Her mind was not apt to
be assailed by sickly fancies; she had the vivid intellect and the
healthy human passion, which are too keenly alive to the constant
relations of things to have any morbid craving after the exceptional.
Still the images of the vision she despised jarred and distressed her
like painful and cruel cries.  And it was the first time she had
witnessed the struggle with approaching death: her young life had been
sombre, but she had known nothing of the utmost human needs; no acute
suffering--no heart-cutting sorrow; and this brother, come back to her
in his hour of supreme agony, was like a sudden awful apparition from an
invisible world.  The pale faces of sorrow in the fresco on the opposite
wall seemed to have come nearer, and to make one company with the pale
face on the bed.

"Frate," said the dying voice.

Fra Girolamo leaned down.  But no other word came for some moments.

"Romola," it said next.

She leaned forward too: but again there was silence.  The words were
struggling in vain.

"Fra Girolamo, give her--"

"The crucifix," said the voice of Fra Girolamo.

No other sound came from the dying lips.

"Dino!" said Romola, with a low but piercing cry, as the certainty came
upon her that the silence of misunderstanding could never be broken.

"Take the crucifix, my daughter," said Fra Girolamo, after a few
minutes.  "His eyes behold it no more."

Romola stretched out her hand to the crucifix, and this act appeared to
relieve the tension of her mind.  A great sob burst from her.  She bowed
her head by the side of her dead brother, and wept aloud.

It seemed to her as if this first vision of death must alter the
daylight for her for evermore.

Fra Girolamo moved towards the door, and called in a lay Brother who was
waiting outside.  Then he went up to Romola and said in a tone of gentle
command, "Rise, my daughter, and be comforted.  Our brother is with the
blessed.  He has left you the crucifix, in remembrance of the heavenly
warning--that it may be a beacon to you in the darkness."

She rose from her knees, trembling, folded her veil over her head, and
hid the crucifix under her mantle.  Fra Girolamo then led the way out
into the cloistered court, lit now only by the stars and by a lantern
which was held by some one near the entrance.  Several other figures in
the dress of the dignified laity were grouped about the same spot.  They
were some of the numerous frequenters of San Marco, who had come to
visit the Prior, and having heard that he was in attendance on the dying
Brother in the chapter-house, had awaited him here.

Romola was dimly conscious of footsteps and rustling forms moving aside:
she heard the voice of Fra Girolamo saying, in a low tone, "Our brother
is departed;" she felt a hand laid on her arm.  The next moment the door
was opened, and she was out in the wide piazza of San Marco, with no one
but Monna Brigida, and the servant carrying the lantern.

The fresh sense of space revived her, and helped her to recover her
self-mastery.  The scene which had just closed upon her was terribly
distinct and vivid, but it began to narrow under the returning
impressions of the life that lay outside it.  She hastened her steps,
with nervous anxiety to be again with her father--and with Tito--for
were they not together in her absence?  The images of that vision, while
they clung about her like a hideous dream not yet to be shaken off, made
her yearn all the more for the beloved faces and voices that would
assure her of her waking life.

Tito, we know, was not with Bardo; his destiny was being shaped by a
guilty consciousness, urging on him the despairing belief that by this
time Romola possessed the knowledge which would lead to their final
separation.

And the lips that could have conveyed that knowledge were for ever
closed.  The prevision that Fra Luca's words had imparted to Romola had
been such as comes from the shadowy region where human souls seek wisdom
apart from the human sympathies which are the very life and substance of
our wisdom; the revelation that might have come from the simple
questions of filial and brotherly affection had been carried into
irrevocable silence.



CHAPTER SIXTEEN.

A FLORENTINE JOKE.

Early the next morning Tito was returning from Bratti's shop in the
narrow thoroughfare of the Ferravecchi.  The Genoese stranger had
carried away the onyx ring, and Tito was carrying away fifty florins.
It did just cross his mind that if, after all, Fortune, by one of her
able devices, saved him from the necessity of quitting Florence, it
would be better for him not to have parted with his ring, since he had
been understood to wear it for the sake of peculiar memories and
predilections; still, it was a slight matter, not worth dwelling on with
any emphasis, and in those moments he had lost his confidence in
fortune.  The feverish excitement of the first alarm which had impelled
his mind to travel into the future had given place to a dull, regretful
lassitude.  He cared so much for the pleasures that could only come to
him through the good opinion of his fellow-men, that he wished now he
had never risked ignominy by shrinking from what his fellow-men called
obligations.

But our deeds are like children that are born to us; they live and act
apart from our own will.  Nay, children may be strangled, but deeds
never: they have an indestructible life both in and out of our
consciousness; and that dreadful vitality of deeds was pressing hard on
Tito for the first time.

He was going back to his lodgings in the Piazza di San Giovanni, but he
avoided passing through the Mercato Vecchio, which was his nearest way,
lest he should see Tessa.  He was not in the humour to seek anything; he
could only await the first sign of his altering lot.

The piazza with its sights of beauty was lit up by that warm morning
sunlight under which the autumn dew still lingers, and which invites to
an idlesse undulled by fatigue.  It was a festival morning, too, when
the soft warmth seems to steal over one with a special invitation to
lounge and gaze.  Here, too, the signs of the fair were present; in the
spaces round the octagonal baptistery, stalls were being spread with
fruit and flowers, and here and there laden mules were standing quietly
absorbed in their nose-bags, while their drivers were perhaps gone
through the hospitable sacred doors to kneel before the blessed Virgin
on this morning of her Nativity.  On the broad marble steps of the Duomo
there were scattered groups of beggars and gossiping talkers: here an
old crone with white hair and hard sunburnt face encouraging a
round-capped baby to try its tiny bare feet on the warmed marble, while
a dog sitting near snuffed at the performance suspiciously; there a
couple of shaggy-headed boys leaning to watch a small pale cripple who
was cutting a face on a cherry-stone; and above them on the wide
platform men were making changing knots in laughing desultory chat, or
else were standing in close couples gesticulating eagerly.

But the largest and most important company of loungers was that towards
which Tito had to direct his steps.  It was the busiest time of the day
with Nello, and in this warm season and at an hour when clients were
numerous, most men preferred being shaved under the pretty red and white
awning in front of the shop rather than within narrow walls.  It is not
a sublime attitude for a man, to sit with lathered chin thrown backward,
and have his nose made a handle of; but to be shaved was a fashion of
Florentine respectability, and it is astonishing how gravely men look at
each other when they are all in the fashion.  It was the hour of the
day, too, when yesterday's crop of gossip was freshest, and the barber's
tongue was always in its glory when his razor was busy; the deft
activity of those two instruments seemed to be set going by a common
spring.  Tito foresaw that it would be impossible for him to escape
being drawn into the circle; he must smile and retort, and look
perfectly at his ease.  Well! it was but the ordeal of swallowing bread
and cheese pills after all.  The man who let the mere anticipation of
discovery choke him was simply a man of weak nerves.

But just at that time Tito felt a hand laid on his shoulder, and no
amount of previous resolution could prevent the very unpleasant
sensation with which that sudden touch jarred him.  His face, as he
turned it round, betrayed the inward shock; but the owner of the hand
that seemed to have such evil magic in it broke into a light laugh.  He
was a young man about Tito's own age, with keen features, small
close-clipped head, and close-shaven lip and chin, giving the idea of a
mind as little encumbered as possible with material that was not
nervous.  The keen eyes were bright with hope and friendliness, as so
many other young eyes have been that have afterwards closed on the world
in bitterness and disappointment; for at that time there were none but
pleasant predictions about Niccolo Macchiavelli, as a young man of
promise, who was expected to mend the broken fortunes of his ancient
family.

"Why, Melema, what evil dream did you have last night, that you took my
light grasp for that of a _sbirro_ or something worse?"

"Ah, Messer Niccolo!" said Tito, recovering himself immediately; "it
must have been an extra amount of dulness in my veins this morning that
shuddered at the approach of your wit.  But the fact is, I have had a
bad night."

"That is unlucky, because you will be expected to shine without any
obstructing fog to-day in the Rucellai Gardens.  I take it for granted
you are to be there."

"Messer Bernardo did me the honour to invite me," said Tito; "but I
shall be engaged elsewhere."

"Ah!  I remember, you are in love," said Macchiavelli, with a shrug,
"else you would never have such inconvenient engagements.  Why, we are
to eat a peacock and ortolans under the loggia among Bernardo Rucellai's
rare trees; there are to be the choicest spirits in Florence and the
choicest wines.  Only, as Piero de' Medici is to be there, the choice
spirits may happen to be swamped in the capping of impromptu verses.  I
hate that game; it is a device for the triumph of small wits, who are
always inspired the most by the smallest occasions."

"What is that you are saying about Piero de' Medici and small wits,
Messer Niccolo?" said Nello, whose light figure was at that moment
predominating over the Herculean frame of Niccolo Caparra.

That famous worker in iron, whom we saw last with bared muscular arms
and leathern apron in the Mercato Vecchio, was this morning dressed in
holiday suit, and as he sat submissively while Nello skipped round him,
lathered him, seized him by the nose, and scraped him with magical
quickness, he looked much as a lion might if it had donned linen and
tunic and was preparing to go into society.

"A private secretary will never rise in the world if he couples great
and small in that way," continued Nello.  "When great men are not
allowed to marry their sons and daughters as they like, small men must
not expect to marry their words as they like.  Have you heard the news
Domenico Cennini, here, has been telling us?--that Pagolantonio Soderini
has given Ser Piero da Bibbiena a box on the ear for setting on Piero
de' Medici to interfere with the marriage between young Tommaso Soderini
and Fiammetta Strozzi, and is to be sent ambassador to Venice as a
punishment?"

"I don't know which I envy him most," said Macchiavelli, "the offence or
the punishment.  The offence will make him the most popular man in all
Florence, and the punishment will take him among the only people in
Italy who have known how to manage their own affairs."

"Yes, if Soderini stays long enough at Venice," said Cennini, "he may
chance to learn the Venetian fashion, and bring it home with him.  The
Soderini have been fast friends of the Medici, but what has happened is
likely to open Pagolantonio's eyes to the good of our old Florentine
trick of choosing a new harness when the old one galls us; if we have
not quite lost the trick in these last fifty years."

"Not we," said Niccolo Caparra, who was rejoicing in the free use of his
lips again.  "Eat eggs in Lent and the snow will melt.  That's what I
say to our people when they get noisy over their cups at San Gallo, and
talk of raising a _romor_ (insurrection): I say, never do you plan a
_romor_; you may as well try to fill Arno with buckets.  When there's
water enough Arno will be full, and that will not be till the torrent is
ready."

"Caparra, that oracular speech of yours is due to my excellent shaving,"
said Nello.  "You could never have made it with that dark rust on your
chin.  Ecco, Messer Domenico, I am ready for you now.  By the way, my
bel erudito," continued Nello, as he saw Tito moving towards the door,
"here has been old Maso seeking for you, but your nest was empty.  He
will come again presently.  The old man looked mournful, and seemed in
haste.  I hope there is nothing wrong in the Via de' Bardi."

"Doubtless Messer Tito knows that Bardo's son is dead," said Cronaca,
who had just come up.

Tito's heart gave a leap--had the death happened before Romola saw him?

"No, I had not heard it," he said, with no more discomposure than the
occasion seemed to warrant, turning and leaning against the doorpost, as
if he had given up his intention of going away.  "I knew that his sister
had gone to see him.  Did he die before she arrived?"

"No," said Cronaca; "I was in San Marco at the time, and saw her come
out from the chapter-house with Fra Girolamo, who told us that the dying
man's breath had been preserved as by a miracle, that he might make a
disclosure to his sister."

Tito felt that his fate was decided.  Again his mind rushed over all the
circumstances of his departure from Florence, and he conceived a plan of
getting back his money from Cennini before the disclosure had become
public.  If he once had his money he need not stay long in endurance of
scorching looks and biting words.  He would wait now, and go away with
Cennini and get the money from him at once.  With that project in his
mind he stood motionless--his hands in his belt, his eyes fixed absently
on the ground.  Nello, glancing at him, felt sure that he was absorbed
in anxiety about Romola, and thought him such a pretty image of
self-forgetful sadness, that he just perceptibly pointed his razor at
him, and gave a challenging look at Piero di Cosimo, whom he had never
forgiven for his refusal to see any prognostics of character in his
favourite's handsome face.  Piero, who was leaning against the other
doorpost, close to Tito, shrugged his shoulders: the frequent recurrence
of such challenges from Nello had changed the painter's first
declaration of neutrality into a positive inclination to believe ill of
the much-praised Greek.

"So you have got your Fra Girolamo back again, Cronaca?  I suppose we
shall have him preaching again this next Advent," said Nello.

"And not before there is need," said Cronaca, gravely.  "We have had the
best testimony to his words since the last Quaresima; for even to the
wicked wickedness has become a plague; and the ripeness of vice is
turning to rottenness in the nostrils even of the vicious.  There has
not been a change since the Quaresima, either in Rome or at Florence,
but has put a new seal on the Frate's words--that the harvest of sin is
ripe, and that God will reap it with a sword."

"I hope he has had a new vision, however," said Francesco Cei,
sneeringly.  "The old ones are somewhat stale.  Can't your Frate get a
poet to help out his imagination for him?"

"He has no lack of poets about him," said Cronaca, with quiet contempt,
"but they are great poets and not little ones; so they are contented to
be taught by him, and no more think the truth stale which God has given
him to utter, than they think the light of the moon is stale.  But
perhaps certain high prelates and princes who dislike the Frate's
denunciations might be pleased to hear that, though Giovanni Pico, and
Poliziano, and Marsilio Ficino, and most other men of mark in Florence,
reverence Fra Girolamo, Messer Francesco Cei despises him."

"Poliziano?" said Cei, with a scornful laugh.  "Yes, doubtless he
believes in your new Jonah; witness the fine orations he wrote for the
envoys of Sienna, to tell Alexander the Sixth that the world and the
Church were never so well off as since he became Pope."

"Nay, Francesco," said Macchiavelli, smiling, "a various scholar must
have various opinions.  And as for the Frate, whatever we may think of
his saintliness, you judge his preaching too narrowly.  The secret of
oratory lies, not in saying new things, but in saying things with a
certain power that moves the hearers--without which, as old Filelfo has
said, your speaker deserves to be called, `non oratorem, sed aratorem.'
And, according to that test, Fra Girolamo is a great orator."

"That is true, Niccolo," said Cennini, speaking from the shaving-chair,
"but part of the secret lies in the prophetic visions.  Our people--no
offence to you, Cronaca--will run after anything in the shape of a
prophet, especially if he prophesies terrors and tribulations."

"Rather say, Cennini," answered Cronaca, "that the chief secret lies in
the Frate's pure life and strong faith, which stamp him as a messenger
of God."

"I admit it--I admit it," said Cennini, opening his palms, as he rose
from the chair.  "His life is spotless: no man has impeached it."

"He is satisfied with the pleasant lust of arrogance," Cei burst out,
bitterly.  "I can see it in that proud lip and satisfied eye of his.  He
hears the air filled with his own name--Fra Girolamo Savonarola, of
Ferrara; the prophet, the saint, the mighty preacher, who frightens the
very babies of Florence into laying down their wicked baubles."

"Come, come, Francesco, you are out of humour with waiting," said the
conciliatory Nello.  "Let me stop your mouth with a little lather.  I
must not have my friend Cronaca made angry: I have a regard for his
chin; and his chin is in no respect altered since he became a Piagnone.
And for my own part, I confess, when the Frate was preaching in the
Duomo last Advent, I got into such a trick of slipping in to listen to
him that I might have turned Piagnone too, if I had not been hindered by
the liberal nature of my art; and also by the length of the sermons,
which are sometimes a good while before they get to the moving point.
But, as Messer Niccolo here says, the Frate lays hold of the people by
some power over and above his prophetic visions.  Monks and nuns who
prophesy are not of that rareness.  For what says Luigi Pulci?
`Dombruno's sharp-cutting scimitar had the fame of being enchanted;
but,' says Luigi, `I am rather of opinion that it cut sharp because it
was of strongly-tempered steel.'  Yes, yes; Paternosters may shave
clean, but they must be said over a good razor."

"See, Nello!" said Macchiavelli, "what doctor is this advancing on his
Bucephalus?  I thought your piazza was free from those furred and
scarlet-robed lackeys of death.  This man looks as if he had had some
such night adventure as Boccaccio's Maestro Simone, and had his bonnet
and mantle pickled a little in the gutter; though he himself is as sleek
as a miller's rat."

"A-ah!" said Nello, with a low long-drawn intonation, as he looked up
towards the advancing figure--a round-headed, round-bodied personage,
seated on a raw young horse, which held its nose out with an air of
threatening obstinacy, and by a constant effort to back and go off in an
oblique line showed free views about authority very much in advance of
the age.

"And I have a few more adventures in pickle for him," continued Nello,
in an undertone, "which I hope will drive his inquiring nostrils to
another quarter of the city.  He's a doctor from Padua; they say he has
been at Prato for three months, and now he's come to Florence to see
what he can net.  But his great trick is making rounds among the
contadini.  And do you note those great saddle-bags he carries?  They
are to hold the fat capons and eggs and meal he levies on silly clowns
with whom coin is scarce.  He vends his own secret medicines, so he
keeps away from the doors of the druggists; and for this last week he
has taken to sitting in my piazza for two or three hours every day, and
making it a resort for asthmas and squalling bambini.  It stirs my gall
to see the toad-faced quack fingering the greasy quattrini, or bagging a
pigeon in exchange for his pills and powders.  But I'll put a few thorns
in his saddle, else I'm no Florentine.  Laudamus! he is coming to be
shaved; that's what I've waited for.  Messer Domenico, go not away:
wait; you shall see a rare bit of fooling, which I devised two days ago.
Here, Sandro!"

Nello whispered in the ear of Sandro, who rolled his solemn eyes,
nodded, and, following up these signs of understanding with a slow
smile, took to his heels with surprising rapidity.

"How is it with you, Maestro Tacco?" said Nello, as the doctor, with
difficulty, brought his horse's head round towards the barber's shop.
"That is a fine young horse of yours, but something raw in the mouth,
eh?"

"He is an accursed beast, the _vermocane_ seize him!" said Maestro
Tacco, with a burst of irritation, descending from his saddle and
fastening the old bridle, mended with string, to an iron staple in the
wall.  "Nevertheless," he added, recollecting himself, "a sound beast
and a valuable, for one who wanted to purchase, and get a profit by
training him.  I had him cheap."

"Rather too hard riding for a man who carries your weight of learning:
eh, Maestro?" said Nello.  "You seem hot."

"Truly, I am likely to be hot," said the doctor, taking off his bonnet,
and giving to full view a bald low head and flat broad face, with high
ears, wide lipless mouth, round eyes, and deep arched lines above the
projecting eyebrows, which altogether made Nello's epithet "toad-faced"
dubiously complimentary to the blameless batrachian.  "Riding from
Peretola, when the sun is high, is not the same thing as kicking your
heels on a bench in the shade, like your Florence doctors.  Moreover, I
have had not a little pulling to get through the carts and mules into
the Mercato, to find out the husband of a certain Monna Ghita, who had
had a fatal seizure before I was called in; and if it had not been that
I had to demand my fees--"

"Monna Ghita!" said Nello, as the perspiring doctor interrupted himself
to rub his head and face.  "Peace be with her angry soul!  The Mercato
will want a whip the more if her tongue is laid to rest."

Tito, who had roused himself from his abstraction, and was listening to
the dialogue, felt a new rush of the vague half-formed ideas about
Tessa, which had passed through his mind the evening before: if Monna
Ghita were really taken out of the way, it would be easier for him to
see Tessa again--whenever he wanted to see her.

"_Gnaffe_, Maestro," Nello went on, in a sympathising tone, "you are the
slave of rude mortals, who, but for you, would die like brutes, without
help of pill or powder.  It is pitiful to see your learned lymph oozing
from your pores as if it were mere vulgar moisture.  You think my
shaving will cool and disencumber you?  One moment and I have done with
Messer Francesco here.  It seems to me a thousand years till I wait upon
a man who carries all the science of Arabia in his head and saddle-bags.
Ecco!"

Nello held up the shaving-cloth with an air of invitation, and Maestro
Tacco advanced and seated himself under a preoccupation with his heat
and his self-importance, which made him quite deaf to the irony conveyed
in Nello's officiously polite speech.

"It is but fitting that a great medicus like you," said Nello, adjusting
the cloth, "should be shaved by the same razor that has shaved the
illustrious Antonio Benevieni, the greatest master of the chirurgic
art."

"The chirurgic art!" interrupted the doctor, with an air of contemptuous
disgust.  "Is it your Florentine fashion to put the masters of the
science of medicine on a level with men who do carpentry on broken
limbs, and sew up wounds like tailors, and carve away excrescences as a
butcher trims meat?  _Via_!  A manual art, such as any artificer might
learn, and which has been practised by simple barbers like yourself--on
a level with the noble science of Hippocrates, Galen, and Avicenna,
which penetrates into the occult influences of the stars and plants and
gems!--a science locked up from the vulgar!"

"No, in truth, Maestro," said Nello, using his lather very deliberately,
as if he wanted to prolong the operation to the utmost, "I never thought
of placing them on a level: I know your science comes next to the
miracles of Holy Church for mystery.  But there, you see, is the pity of
it,"--here Nello fell into a tone of regretful sympathy--"your high
science is sealed from the profane and the vulgar, and so you become an
object of envy and slander.  I grieve to say it, but there are low
fellows in this city--mere _sgherri_, who go about in nightcaps and long
beards, and make it their business to sprinkle gall in every man's broth
who is prospering.  Let me tell you--for you are a stranger--this is a
city where every man had need carry a large nail ready to fasten on the
wheel of Fortune when his side happens to be uppermost.  Already there
are stories--mere fables doubtless--beginning to be buzzed about
concerning you, that make me wish I could hear of your being well on
your way to Arezzo.  I would not have a man of your metal stoned, for
though San Stefano was stoned, he was not great in medicine like San
Cosmo and San Damiano..."

"What stories? what fables?" stammered Maestro Tacco.  "What do you
mean?"

"_Lasso_!  I fear me you are come into the trap for your cheese,
Maestro.  The fact is, there is a company of evil youths who go prowling
about the houses of our citizens carrying sharp tools in their
pockets;--no sort of door, or window, or shutter, but they will pierce
it.  They are possessed with a diabolical patience to watch the doings
of people who fancy themselves private.  It must be they who have done
it--it must be they who have spread the stories about you and your
medicines.  Have you by chance detected any small aperture in your door,
or window-shutter?  No?  Well, I advise you to look; for it is now
commonly talked of that you have been seen in your dwelling at the Canto
di Paglia, making your secret specifics by night: pounding dried toads
in a mortar, compounding a salve out of mashed worms, and making your
pills from the dried livers of rats which you mix with saliva emitted
during the utterance of a blasphemous incantation--which indeed these
witnesses profess to repeat."

"It is a pack of lies!" exclaimed the doctor, struggling to get
utterance, and then desisting in alarm at the approaching razor.

"It is not to me, or any of this respectable company, that you need to
say that, doctor.  _We_ are not the heads to plant such carrots as those
in.  But what of that?  What are a handful of reasonable men against a
crowd with stones in their hands?  There are those among us who think
Cecco d'Ascoli was an innocent sage--and we all know how he was burnt
alive for being wiser than his fellows.  Ah, doctor, it is not by living
at Padua that you can learn to know Florentines.  My belief is, they
would stone the Holy Father himself, if they could find a good excuse
for it; and they are persuaded that you are a necromancer, who is trying
to raise the pestilence by selling secret medicines--and I am told your
specifics have in truth an evil smell."

"It is false!" burst out the doctor, as Nello moved away his razor; "it
is false!  I will show the pills and the powders to these honourable
signori--and the salve--it has an excellent odour--an odour of--of
salve."  He started up with the lather on his chin, and the cloth round
his neck, to search in his saddle-bag for the belied medicines, and
Nello in an instant adroitly shifted the shaving-chair till it was in
the close vicinity of the horse's head, while Sandro, who had now
returned, at a sign from his master placed himself near the bridle.

"Behold, Messeri!" said the doctor, bringing a small box of medicines
and opening it before them.

"Let any signor apply this box to his nostrils and he will find an
honest odour of medicaments--not indeed of pounded gems, or rare
vegetables from the East, or stones found in the bodies of birds; for I
practise on the diseases of the vulgar, for whom heaven has provided
cheaper and less powerful remedies according to their degree: and there
are even remedies known to our science which are entirely free of cost--
as the new _tussis_ may be counteracted in the poor, who can pay for no
specifics, by a resolute holding of the breath.  And here is a paste
which is even of savoury odour, and is infallible against melancholia,
being concocted under the conjunction of Jupiter and Venus; and I have
seen it allay spasms."

"Stay, Maestro," said Nello, while the doctor had his lathered face
turned towards the group near the door, eagerly holding out his box, and
lifting out one specific after another; "here comes a crying contadina
with her baby.  Doubtless she is in search of you; it is perhaps an
opportunity for you to show this honourable company a proof of your
skill.  Here, buona donna! here is the famous doctor.  Why, what is the
matter with the sweet _bimbo_?"

This question was addressed to a sturdy-looking, broad-shouldered
contadina, with her head-drapery folded about her face so that little
was to be seen but a bronzed nose and a pair of dark eyes and eyebrows.
She carried her child packed up in the stiff mummy-shaped case in which
Italian babies have been from time immemorial introduced into society,
turning its face a little towards her bosom, and making those sorrowful
grimaces which women are in the habit of using as a sort of pulleys to
draw down reluctant tears.

"Oh, for the love of the Holy Madonna!" said the woman, in a wailing
voice; "will you look at my poor bimbo?  I know I can't pay you for it,
but I took it into the Nunziata last night, and it's turned a worse
colour than before; it's the convulsions.  But when I was holding it
before the Santissima Nunziata, I remembered they said there was a new
doctor come who cured everything; and so I thought it might be the will
of the Holy Madonna that I should bring it to you."

"Sit down, Maestro, sit down," said Nello.  "Here is an opportunity for
you; here are honourable witnesses who will declare before the
Magnificent Eight that they have seen you practising honestly and
relieving a poor woman's child.  And then if your life is in danger, the
Magnificent Eight will put you in prison a little while just to insure
your safety, and after that, their sbirri will conduct you out of
Florence by night, as they did the zealous Frate Minore who preached
against the Jews.  What! our people are given to stone-throwing; but we
have magistrates."

The doctor, unable to refuse, seated himself in the shaving-chair,
trembling, half with fear and half with rage, and by this time quite
unconscious of the lather which Nello had laid on with such profuseness.
He deposited his medicine-case on his knees, took out his precious
spectacles (wondrous Florentine device!) from his wallet, lodged them
carefully above his flat nose and high ears, and lifting up his brows,
turned towards the applicant.

"O Santiddio! look at him," said the woman, with a more piteous wail
than ever, as she held out the small mummy, which had its head
completely concealed by dingy drapery wound round the head of the
portable cradle, but seemed to be struggling and crying in a demoniacal
fashion under this imprisonment.  "The fit is on him!  _Ohime_!  I know
what colour he is; it's the evil eye--oh!"

The doctor, anxiously holding his knees together to support his box,
bent his spectacles towards the baby, and said cautiously, "It may be a
new disease; unwind these rags, Monna!"

The contadina, with sudden energy, snatched off the encircling linen,
when out struggled--scratching, grinning, and screaming--what the doctor
in his fright fully believed to be a demon, but what Tito recognised as
Vaiano's monkey, made more formidable by an artificial blackness, such
as might have come from a hasty rubbing up the chimney.

Up started the unfortunate doctor, letting his medicine-box fall, and
away jumped the no less terrified and indignant monkey, finding the
first resting-place for his claws on the horse's mane, which he used as
a sort of rope-ladder till he had fairly found his equilibrium, when he
continued to clutch it as a bridle.  The horse wanted no spur under such
a rider, and, the already loosened bridle offering no resistance, darted
off across the piazza, with the monkey, clutching, grinning, and
blinking, on his neck.

"_Il cavallo!  Il Diavolo_!" was now shouted on all sides by the idle
rascals who gathered from all quarters of the piazza, and was echoed in
tones of alarm by the stall-keepers, whose vested interests seemed in
some danger; while the doctor, out of his wits with confused terror at
the Devil, the possible stoning, and the escape of his horse, took to
his heels with spectacles on nose, lathered face, and the shaving-cloth
about his neck, crying--"Stop him! stop him! for a powder--a florin--
stop him for a florin!" while the lads, outstripping him, clapped their
hands and shouted encouragement to the runaway.

The _cerretano_, who had not bargained for the flight of his monkey
along with the horse, had caught up his petticoats with much celerity,
and showed a pair of parti-coloured hose above his contadina's shoes,
far in advance of the doctor.  And away went the grotesque race up the
Corso degli Adimari--the horse with the singular jockey, the contadina
with the remarkable hose, and the doctor in lather and spectacles, with
furred mantle outflying.

It was a scene such as Florentines loved, from the potent and reverend
signor going to council in his lucco, down to the grinning youngster,
who felt himself master of all situations when his bag was filled with
smooth stones from the convenient dry bed of the torrent.  The
grey-headed Domenico Cennini laughed no less heartily than the younger
men, and Nello was triumphantly secure of the general admiration.

"Aha!" he exclaimed, snapping his fingers when the first burst of
laughter was subsiding.  "I have cleared my piazza of that unsavoury
fly-trap, _mi pare_.  Maestro Tacco will no more come here again to sit
for patients than he will take to licking marble for his dinner."

"You are going towards the Piazza della Signoria, Messer Domenico," said
Macchiavelli.  "I will go with you, and we shall perhaps see who has
deserved the _palio_ among these racers.  Come, Melema, will you go
too?"

It had been precisely Tito's intention to accompany Cennini, but before
he had gone many steps, he was called back by Nello, who saw Maso
approaching.

Maso's message was from Romola.  She wished Tito to go to the Via de'
Bardi as soon as possible.  She would see him under the loggia, at the
top of the house, as she wished to speak to him alone.



CHAPTER SEVENTEEN.

UNDER THE LOGGIA.

The loggia at the top of Bardo's house rose above the buildings on each
side of it, and formed a gallery round quadrangular walls.  On the side
towards the street the roof was supported by columns; but on the
remaining sides, by a wall pierced with arched openings, so that at the
back, looking over a crowd of irregular, poorly-built dwellings towards
the hill of Bogoli, Romola could at all times have a walk sheltered from
observation.  Near one of those arched openings, close to the door by
which he had entered the loggia, Tito awaited her, with a sickening
sense of the sunlight that slanted before him and mingled itself with
the ruin of his hopes.  He had never for a moment relied on Romola's
passion for him as likely to be too strong for the repulsion created by
the discovery of his secret; he had not the presumptuous vanity which
might have hindered him from feeling that her love had the same root
with her belief in him.  But as he imagined her coming towards him in
her radiant beauty, made so loveably mortal by her soft hazel eyes, he
fell into wishing that she had been something lower, if it were only
that she might let him clasp her and kiss her before they parted.  He
had had no real caress from her--nothing but now and then a long glance,
a kiss, a pressure of the hand; and he had so often longed that they
should be alone together.  They were going to be alone now; but he saw
her standing inexorably aloof from him.  His heart gave a great throb as
he saw the door move: Romola was there.  It was all like a flash of
lightning: he felt, rather than saw, the glory about her head, the
tearful appealing eyes; he felt, rather than heard, the cry of love with
which she said, "Tito!"

And in the same moment she was in his arms, and sobbing with her face
against his.

How poor Romola had yearned through the watches of the night to see that
bright face!  The new image of death; the strange bewildering doubt
infused into her by the story of a life removed from her understanding
and sympathy; the haunting vision, which she seemed not only to hear
uttered by the low gasping voice, but to live through, as if it had been
her own dream, had made her more conscious than ever that it was Tito
who had first brought the warm stream of hope and gladness into her
life, and who had first turned away the keen edge of pain in the
remembrance of her brother.  She would tell Tito everything; there was
no one else to whom she could tell it.  She had been restraining herself
in the presence of her father all the morning; but now, that
long-pent-up sob might come forth.  Proud and self-controlled to all the
world beside, Romola was as simple and unreserved as a child in her love
for Tito.  She had been quite contented with the days when they had only
looked at each other; but now, when she felt the need of clinging to
him, there was no thought that hindered her.

"My Romola! my goddess!"  Tito murmured with passionate fondness, as he
clasped her gently, and kissed the thick golden ripples on her neck.  He
was in paradise: disgrace, shame, parting--there was no fear of them any
longer.  This happiness was too strong to be marred by the sense that
Romola was deceived in him; nay, he could only rejoice in her delusion;
for, after all, concealment had been wisdom.  The only thing he could
regret was his needless dread; if, indeed, the dread had not been worth
suffering for the sake of this sudden rapture.

The sob had satisfied itself, and Romola raised her head.  Neither of
them spoke; they stood looking at each other's faces with that sweet
wonder which belongs to young love--she with her long white hands on the
dark-brown curls, and he with his dark fingers bathed in the streaming
gold.  Each was so beautiful to the other; each was experiencing that
undisturbed mutual consciousness for the first time.  The cold pressure
of a new sadness on Romola's heart made her linger the more in that
silent soothing sense of nearness and love; and Tito could not even seek
to press his lips to hers, because that would be change.

"Tito," she said at last, "it has been altogether painful, but I must
tell you everything.  Your strength will help me to resist the
impressions that will not be shaken off by reason."

"I know, Romola--I know he is dead," said Tito; and the long lustrous
eyes told nothing of the many wishes that would have brought about that
death long ago if there had been such potency in mere wishes.  Romola
only read her own pure thoughts in their dark depths, as we read letters
in happy dreams.

"So changed, Tito!  It pierced me to think that it was Dino.  And so
strangely hard: not a word to my father; nothing but a vision that he
wanted to tell me.  And yet it was so piteous--the struggling breath,
and the eyes that seemed to look towards the crucifix, and yet not to
see it.  I shall never forget it; it seems as if it would come between
me and everything I shall look at."

Romola's heart swelled again, so that she was forced to break off.  But
the need she felt to disburden her mind to Tito urged her to repress the
rising anguish.  When she began to speak again, her thoughts had
travelled a little.

"It was strange, Tito.  The vision was about our marriage, and yet he
knew nothing of you."

"What was it, my Romola?  Sit down and tell me," said Tito, leading her
to the bench that stood near.  A fear had come across him lest the
vision should somehow or other relate to Baldassarre; and this sudden
change of feeling prompted him to seek a change of position.

Romola told him all that had passed, from her entrance into San Marco,
hardly leaving out one of her brother's words, which had burnt
themselves into her memory as they were spoken.  But when she was at the
end of the vision, she paused; the rest came too vividly before her to
be uttered, and she sat looking at the distance, almost unconscious for
the moment that Tito was near her.  _His_ mind was at ease now; that
vague vision had passed over him like white mist, and left no mark.  But
he was silent, expecting her to speak again.

"I took it," she went on, as if Tito had been reading her thoughts; "I
took the crucifix; it is down below in my bedroom."

"And now, my Romola," said Tito, entreatingly, "you will banish these
ghastly thoughts.  The vision was an ordinary monkish vision, bred of
fasting and fanatical ideas.  It surely has no weight with you."

"No, Tito; no.  But poor  Dino, _he_ believed it was a divine message.
It is strange," she went on meditatively, "this life of men possessed
with fervid beliefs that seem like madness to their fellow-beings.  Dino
was not a vulgar fanatic; and that Fra Girolamo--his very voice seems to
have penetrated me with a sense that there is some truth in what moves
them: some truth of which I know nothing."

"It was only because your feelings were highly wrought, my Romola.  Your
brother's state of mind was no more than a form of that theosophy which
has been the common disease of excitable dreamy minds in all ages; the
same ideas that your father's old antagonist, Marsilio Ficino, pores
over in the New Platonists; only your brother's passionate nature drove
him to act out what other men write and talk about.  And for Fra
Girolamo, he is simply a narrow-minded monk, with a gift of preaching
and infusing terror into the multitude.  Any words or any voice would
have shaken you at that moment.  When your mind has had a little repose,
you will judge of such things as you have always done before."

"Not about poor Dino," said Romola.  "I was angry with him; my heart
seemed to close against him while he was speaking; but since then I have
thought less of what was in my own mind and more of what was in his.
Oh, Tito! it was very piteous to see his young life coming to an end in
that way.  That yearning look at the crucifix when he was gasping for
breath--I can never forget it.  Last night I looked at the crucifix a
long while, and tried to see that it would help him, until at last it
seemed to me by the lamplight as if the suffering face shed pity."

"My Romola, promise me to resist such thoughts; they are fit for sickly
nuns, not for my golden-tressed Aurora, who looks made to scatter all
such twilight fantasies.  Try not to think of them now; we shall not
long be alone together."

The last words were uttered in a tone of tender beseeching, and he
turned her face towards him with a gentle touch of his right-hand.

Romola had had her eyes fixed absently on the arched opening, but she
had not seen the distant hill; she had all the while been in the chapter
house, looking at the pale images of sorrow and death.

Tito's touch and beseeching voice recalled her; and now in the warm
sunlight she saw that rich dark beauty which seemed to gather round it
all images of joy--purple vines festooned between the elms, the strong
corn perfecting itself under the vibrating heat, bright winged creatures
hurrying and resting among the flowers, round limbs beating the earth in
gladness with cymbals held aloft, light melodies chanted to the
thrilling rhythm of strings--all objects and all sounds that tell of
Nature revelling in her force.  Strange, bewildering transition from
those pale images of sorrow and death to this bright youthfulness, as of
a sun-god who knew nothing of night!  What thought could reconcile that
worn anguish in her brother's face--that straining after something
invisible--with this satisfied strength and beauty, and make it
intelligible that they belonged to the same world?  Or was there never
any reconciling of them, but only a blind worship of clashing deities,
first in mad joy and then in wailing?  Romola for the first time felt
this questioning need like a sudden uneasy dizziness and want of
something to grasp; it was an experience hardly longer than a sigh, for
the eager theorising of ages is compressed, as in a seed, in the
momentary want of a single mind.  But there was no answer to meet the
need, and it vanished before the returning rush of young sympathy with
the glad loving beauty that beamed upon her in new radiance, like the
dawn after we have looked away from it to the grey west.

"Your mind lingers apart from our love, my Romola," Tito said, with a
soft reproachful murmur.  "It seems a forgotten thing to you."

She looked at the beseeching eyes in silence, till the sadness all
melted out of her own.

"My joy!" she said, in her full clear voice.

"Do you really care for me enough, then, to banish those chill fancies,
or shall you always be suspecting me as the Great Tempter?" said Tito,
with his bright smile.

"How should I not care for you more than for everything else?
Everything I had felt before in all my life--about my father, and about
my loneliness--was a preparation to love you.  You would laugh at me,
Tito, if you knew what sort of man I used to think I should marry--some
scholar with deep lines in his face, like Alamanno Rinuccini, and with
rather grey hair, who would agree with my father in taking the side of
the Aristotelians, and be willing to live with him.  I used to think
about the love I read of in the poets, but I never dreamed that anything
like that could happen to me here in Florence in our old library.  And
then _you_ came, Tito, and were so much to my father, and I began to
believe that life could be happy for me too."

"My goddess! is there any woman like you?" said Tito, with a mixture of
fondness and wondering admiration at the blended majesty and simplicity
in her.

"But, dearest," he went on, rather timidly, "if you minded more about
our marriage, you would persuade your father and Messer Bernardo not to
think of any more delays.  But you seem not to mind about it."

"Yes, Tito, I will, I do mind.  But I am sure my godfather will urge
more delay now, because of Dino's death.  He has never agreed with my
father about disowning Dino, and you know he has always said that we
ought to wait until you have been at least a year in Florence.  Do not
think hardly of my godfather.  I know he is prejudiced and narrow, but
yet he is very noble.  He has often said that it is folly in my father
to want to keep his library apart, that it may bear his name; yet he
would try to get my father's wish carried out.  That seems to me very
great and noble--that power of respecting a feeling which he does not
share or understand."

"I have no rancour against Messer Bernardo for thinking you too precious
for me, my Romola," said Tito: and that was true.  "But your father,
then, knows of his son's death?"

"Yes, I told him--I could not help it.  I told him where I had been, and
that I had seen Dino die; but nothing else; and he has commanded me not
to speak of it again.  But he has been very silent this morning, and has
had those restless movements which always go to my heart; they look as
if he were trying to get outside the prison of his blindness.  Let us go
to him now.  I had persuaded him to try to sleep, because he slept
little in the night.  Your voice will soothe him, Tito: it always does."

"And not one kiss?  I have not had one," said Tito, in his gentle
reproachful tone, which gave him an air of dependence very charming in a
creature with those rare gifts that seem to excuse presumption.

The sweet pink blush spread itself with the quickness of light over
Romola's face and neck as she bent towards him.  It seemed impossible
that their kisses could ever become common things.

"Let us walk once round the loggia," said Romola, "before we go down."

"There is something grim and grave to me always about Florence," said
Tito, as they paused in the front of the house, where they could see
over the opposite roofs to the other side of the river, "and even in its
merriment there is something shrill and hard--biting rather than gay.  I
wish we lived in Southern Italy, where thought is broken, not by
weariness, but by delicious languors such as never seem to come over the
`ingenia acerrima Florentina.'  I should like to see you under that
southern sun, lying among the flowers, subdued into mere enjoyment,
while I bent over you and touched the lute and sang to you some little
unconscious strain that seemed all one with the light and the warmth.
You have never known that happiness of the nymphs, my Romola."

"No; but I have dreamed of it often since you came.  I am very thirsty
for a deep draught of joy--for a life all bright like you.  But we will
not think of it now, Tito; it seems to me as if there would always be
pale sad faces among the flowers, and eyes that look in vain.  Let us
go."



CHAPTER EIGHTEEN.

THE PORTRAIT.

When Tito left the Via de' Bardi that day in exultant satisfaction at
finding himself thoroughly free from the threatened peril, his thoughts,
no longer claimed by the immediate presence of Romola and her father,
recurred to those futile hours of dread in which he was conscious of
having not only felt but acted as he would not have done if he had had a
truer foresight.  He would not have parted with his ring; for Romola,
and others to whom it was a familiar object, would be a little struck
with the apparent sordidness of parting with a gem he had professedly
cherished, unless he feigned as a reason the desire to make some special
gift with the purchase-money; and Tito had at that moment a nauseating
weariness of simulation.  He was well out of the possible consequences
that might have fallen on him from that initial deception, and it was no
longer a load on his mind; kind fortune had brought him immunity, and he
thought it was only fair that she should.  Who was hurt by it?  The
results to Baldassarre were too problematical to be taken into account.
But he wanted now to be free from any hidden shackles that would gall
him, though ever so little, under his ties to Romola.  He was not aware
that that very delight in immunity which prompted resolutions not to
entangle himself again, was deadening the sensibilities which alone
could save him from entanglement.

But, after all, the sale of the ring was a slight matter.  Was it also a
slight matter that little Tessa was under a delusion which would
doubtless fill her small head with expectations doomed to
disappointment?  Should he try to see the little thing alone again and
undeceive her at once, or should he leave the disclosure to time and
chance?  Happy dreams are pleasant, and they easily come to an end with
daylight and the stir of life.  The sweet, pouting, innocent, round
thing!  It was impossible not to think of her.  Tito thought he should
like some time to take her a present that would please her, and just
learn if her step-father treated her more cruelly now her mother was
dead.  Or, should he at once undeceive Tessa, and then tell Romola about
her, so that they might find some happier lot for the poor thing?  No:
that unfortunate little incident of the _cerretano_ and the marriage,
and his allowing Tessa to part from him in delusion, must never be known
to Romola, and since no enlightenment could expel it from Tessa's mind,
there would always be a risk of betrayal; besides even little Tessa
might have some gall in her when she found herself disappointed in her
love--yes, she _must_ be a little in love with him, and that might make
it well that he should not see her again.  Yet it was a trifling
adventure such as a country girl would perhaps ponder on till some ruddy
contadino made acceptable love to her, when she would break her
resolution of secrecy and get at the truth that she was free.
_Dunque_--good-bye, Tessa! kindest wishes!  Tito had made up his mind
that the silly little affair of the _cerretano_ should have no further
consequences for himself; and people are apt to think that resolutions
taken on their own behalf will be firm.  As for the fifty-five florins,
the purchase-money of the ring, Tito had made up his mind what to do
with some of them; he would carry out a pretty ingenious thought which
would set him more at ease in accounting for the absence of his ring to
Romola, and would also serve him as a means of guarding her mind from
the recurrence of those monkish fancies which were especially repugnant
to him; and with this thought in his mind, he went to the Via Gualfonda
to find Piero di Cosimo, the artist who at that time was pre-eminent in
the fantastic mythological design which Tito's purpose required.

Entering the court on which Piero's dwelling opened, Tito found the
heavy iron knocker on the door thickly bound round with wool and
ingeniously fastened with cords.  Remembering the painter's practice of
stuffing his ears against obtrusive noises, Tito was not much surprised
at this mode of defence against visitors' thunder, and betook himself
first to tapping modestly with his knuckles, and then to a more
importunate attempt to shake the door.  In rain!  Tito was moving away,
blaming himself for wasting his time on this visit, instead of waiting
till he saw the painter again at Nello's, when a little girl entered the
court with a basket of eggs on her arm, went up to the door, and
standing on tiptoe, pushed up a small iron plate that ran in grooves,
and putting her mouth to the aperture thus disclosed, called out in a
piping voice, "Messer Piero!"

In a few moments Tito heard the sound of bolts, the door opened, and
Piero presented himself in a red night-cap and a loose brown serge
tunic, with sleeves rolled up to the shoulder.  He darted a look of
surprise at Tito, but without further notice of him stretched out his
hand to take the basket from the child, re-entered the house, and
presently returning with the empty basket, said, "How much to pay?"

"Two grossoni, Messer Piero; they are all ready boiled, my mother says."

Piero took the coin out of the leathern scarsella at his belt, and the
little maiden trotted away, not without a few upward glances of awed
admiration at the surprising young signor.

Piero's glance was much less complimentary as he said--

"What do you want at my door, Messer Greco?  I saw you this morning at
Nello's; if you had asked me then, I could have told you that I see no
man in this house without knowing his business and agreeing with him
beforehand."

"Pardon, Messer Piero," said Tito, with his imperturbable good-humour;
"I acted without sufficient reflection.  I remembered nothing but your
admirable skill in inventing pretty caprices, when a sudden desire for
something of that sort prompted me to come to you."

The painter's manners were too notoriously odd to all the world for this
reception to be held a special affront; but even if Tito had suspected
any offensive intention, the impulse to resentment would have been less
strong in him than the desire to conquer goodwill.

Piero made a grimace which was habitual with him when he was spoken to
with flattering suavity.  He grinned, stretched out the corners of his
mouth, and pressed down his brows, so as to defy any divination of his
feelings under that kind of stroking.

"And what may that need be?" he said, after a moment's pause.  In his
heart he was tempted by the hinted opportunity of applying his
invention.

"I want a very delicate miniature device taken from certain fables of
the poets, which you will know how to combine for me.  It must be
painted on a wooden case--I will show you the size--in the form of a
triptych.  The inside may be simple gilding: it is on the outside I want
the device.  It is a favourite subject with you Florentines--the triumph
of Bacchus and Ariadne; but I want it treated in a new way.  A story in
Ovid will give you the necessary hints.  The young Bacchus must be
seated in a ship, his head bound with clusters of grapes, and a spear
entwined with vine-leaves in his hand: dark-berried ivy must wind about
the masts and sails, the oars must be thyrsi, and flowers must wreathe
themselves about the poop; leopards and tigers must be crouching before
him, and dolphins must be sporting round.  But I want to have the
fair-haired Ariadne with him, made immortal with her golden crown--that
is not in Ovid's story, but no matter, you will conceive it all--and
above there must be young Loves, such as you know how to paint, shooting
with roses at the points of their arrows--"

"Say no more!" said Piero.  "I have Ovid in the vulgar tongue.  Find me
the passage.  I love not to be choked with other men's thoughts.  You
may come in."

Piero led the way through the first room, where a basket of eggs was
deposited on the open hearth, near a heap of broken egg-shells and a
bank of ashes.  In strange keeping with that sordid litter, there was a
low bedstead of carved ebony, covered carelessly with a piece of rich
oriental carpet, that looked as if it had served to cover the steps to a
Madonna's throne; and a carved _cassone_, or large chest, with painted
devices on its sides and lid.  There was hardly any other furniture in
the large room, except casts, wooden steps, easels and rough boxes, all
festooned with cobwebs.

The next room was still larger, but it was also much more crowded.
Apparently Piero was keeping the Festa, for the double door underneath
the window which admitted the painter's light from above, was thrown
open, and showed a garden, or rather thicket, in which fig-trees and
vines grew in tangled trailing wildness among nettles and hemlocks, and
a tall cypress lifted its dark head from a stifling mass of yellowish
mulberry-leaves.  It seemed as if that dank luxuriance had begun to
penetrate even within the walls of the wide and lofty room; for in one
corner, amidst a confused heap of carved marble fragments and rusty
armour, tufts of long grass and dark feathery fennel had made their way,
and a large stone vase, tilted on one side, seemed to be pouring out the
ivy that streamed around.  All about the walls hung pen and oil-sketches
of fantastic sea-monsters; dances of satyrs and maenads; Saint
Margaret's resurrection out of the devouring dragon; Madonnas with the
supernal light upon them; studies of plants and grotesque heads; and on
irregular rough shelves a few books were scattered among great drooping
bunches of corn, bullocks' horns, pieces of dried honeycomb, stones with
patches of rare-coloured lichen, skulls and bones, peacocks' feathers,
and large birds' wings.  Rising from amongst the dirty litter of the
floor were lay figures: one in the frock of a Vallombrosan monk,
strangely surmounted by a helmet with barred visor, another smothered
with brocade and skins hastily tossed over it.  Amongst this
heterogeneous still life, several speckled and white pigeons were
perched or strutting, too tame to fly at the entrance of men; three
corpulent toads were crawling in an intimate friendly way near the
door-stone; and a white rabbit, apparently the model for that which was
frightening Cupid in the picture of Mars and Venus placed on the central
easel, was twitching its nose with much content on a box full of bran.

"And now, Messer Greco," said Piero, making a sign to Tito that he might
sit down on a low stool near the door, and then standing over him with
folded arms, "don't be trying to see everything at once, like Messer
Domeneddio, but let me know how large you would have this same
triptych."

Tito indicated the required dimensions, and Piero marked them on a piece
of paper.

"And now for the book," said Piero, reaching down a manuscript volume.

"There's nothing about the Ariadne there," said Tito, giving him the
passage; "but you will remember I want the crowned Ariadne by the side
of the young Bacchus: she must have golden hair."

"Ha!" said Piero, abruptly, pursing up his lips again.  "And you want
them to be likenesses, eh?" he added, looking down into Tito's face.

Tito laughed and blushed.  "I know you are great at portraits, Messer
Piero; but I could not ask Ariadne to sit for you, because the painting
is a secret."

"There it is!  I want her to sit to me.  Giovanni Vespucci wants me to
paint him a picture of Oedipus and Antigone at Colonos, as he has
expounded it to me: I have a fancy for the subject, and I want Bardo and
his daughter to sit for it.  Now, you ask them; and then I'll put the
likeness into Ariadne."

"Agreed, if I can prevail with them.  And your price for the Bacchus and
Ariadne?"

"_Baie_!  If you get them to let me paint them, that will pay me.  I'd
rather not have your money: you may pay for the case."

"And when shall I sit for you?" said Tito; "for if we have one likeness,
we must have two."

"I don't want _your_ likeness; I've got it already," said Piero, "only
I've made you look frightened.  I must take the fright out of it for
Bacchus."

As he was speaking, Piero laid down the book and went to look among some
paintings, propped with their faces against the wall.  He returned with
an oil-sketch in his hand.

"I call this as good a bit of portrait as I ever did," he said, looking
at it as he advanced.  "Yours is a face that expresses fear well,
because it's naturally a bright one.  I noticed it the first time I saw
you.  The rest of the picture is hardly sketched; but I've painted _you_
in thoroughly."

Piero turned the sketch, and held it towards Tito's eyes.  He saw
himself with his right-hand uplifted, holding a wine-cup, in the
attitude of triumphant joy, but with his face turned away from the cup
with an expression of such intense fear in the dilated eyes and pallid
lips, that he felt a cold stream through his veins, as if he were being
thrown into sympathy with his imaged self.

"You are beginning to look like it already," said Piero, with a short
laugh, moving the picture away again.  "He's seeing a ghost--that fine
young man.  I shall finish it some day, when I've settled what sort of
ghost is the most terrible--whether it should look solid, like a dead
man come to life, or half transparent, like a mist."

Tito, rather ashamed of himself for a sudden sensitiveness strangely
opposed to his usual easy self-command, said carelessly--

"That is a subject after your own heart, Messer Piero--a revel
interrupted by a ghost.  You seem to love the blending of the terrible
with the gay.  I suppose that is the reason your shelves are so well
furnished with death's-heads, while you are painting those roguish Loves
who are running away with the armour of Mars.  I begin to think you are
a Cynic philosopher in the pleasant disguise of a cunning painter."

"Not I, Messer Greco; a philosopher is the last sort of animal I should
choose to resemble.  I find it enough to live, without spinning lies to
account for life.  Fowls cackle, asses bray, women chatter, and
philosophers spin false reasons--that's the effect the sight of the
world brings out of them.  Well, I am an animal that paints instead of
cackling, or braying, or spinning lies.  And now, I think, our business
is done; you'll keep to your side of the bargain about the Oedipus and
Antigone?"

"I will do my best," said Tito--on this strong hint, immediately moving
towards the door.

"And you'll let me know at Nello's.  No need to come here again."

"I understand," said Tito, laughingly, lifting his hand in sign of
friendly parting.



CHAPTER NINETEEN.

THE OLD MAN'S HOPE.

Messer Bernardo del Nero was as inexorable as Romola had expected in his
advice that the marriage should be deferred till Easter, and in this
matter Bardo was entirely under the ascendancy of his sagacious and
practical friend.  Nevertheless, Bernardo himself, though he was as far
as ever from any susceptibility to the personal fascination in Tito
which was felt by others, could not altogether resist that argument of
success which is always powerful with men of the world.  Tito was making
his way rapidly in high quarters.  He was especially growing in favour
with the young Cardinal Giovanni de' Medici, who had even spoken of
Tito's forming part of his learned retinue on an approaching journey to
Rome; and the bright young Greek who had a tongue that was always ready
without ever being quarrelsome, was more and more wished for at gay
suppers in the Via Larga, and at Florentine games in which he had no
pretension to excel, and could admire the incomparable skill of Piero
de' Medici in the most graceful manner in the world.  By an unfailing
sequence, Tito's reputation as an agreeable companion in "magnificent"
society made his learning and talent appear more lustrous: and he was
really accomplished enough to prevent an exaggerated estimate from being
hazardous to him.  Messer Bernardo had old prejudices and attachments
which now began to argue down the newer and feebler prejudice against
the young Greek stranger who was rather too supple.  To the old
Florentine it was impossible to despise the recommendation of standing
well with the best Florentine families, and since Tito began to be
thoroughly received into that circle whose views were the unquestioned
standard of social value, it seemed irrational not to admit that there
was no longer any check to satisfaction in the prospect of such a
son-in-law for Bardo, and such a husband for Romola.  It was undeniable
that Tito's coming had been the dawn of a new life for both father and
daughter, and the first promise had even been surpassed.  The blind old
scholar--whose proud truthfulness would never enter into that commerce
of feigned and preposterous admiration which, varied by a corresponding
measurelessness in vituperation, made the woof of all learned
intercourse--had fallen into neglect even among his fellow-citizens, and
when he was alluded to at all, it had long been usual to say that,
though his blindness and the loss of his son were pitiable misfortunes,
he was tiresome in contending for the value of his own labours; and that
his discontent was a little inconsistent in a man who had been openly
regardless of religious rites, and who in days past had refused offers
made to him from various quarters, on the slight condition that he would
take orders, without which it was not easy for patrons to provide for
every scholar.  But since Tito's coming, there was no longer the same
monotony in the thought that Bardo's name suggested; the old man, it was
understood, had left off his plaints, and the fair daughter was no
longer to be shut up in dowerless pride, waiting for a _parentado_.  The
winning manners and growing favour of the handsome Greek who was
expected to enter into the double relation of son and husband helped to
make the new interest a thoroughly friendly one, and it was no longer a
rare occurrence when a visitor enlivened the quiet library.  Elderly men
came from that indefinite prompting to renew former intercourse which
arises when an old acquaintance begins to be newly talked about; and
young men whom Tito had asked leave to bring once, found it easy to go
again when they overtook him on his way to the Via de' Bardi, and,
resting their hands on his shoulder, fell into easy chat with him.  For
it was pleasant to look at Romola's beauty; to see her, like old
Firenzuola's type of womanly majesty, "sitting with a certain grandeur,
speaking with gravity, smiling with modesty, and casting around, as it
were, an odour of queenliness;" [Note 1] and she seemed to unfold like a
strong white lily under this genial breath of admiration and homage; it
was all one to her with her new bright life in Tito's love.

Tito had even been the means of strengthening the hope in Bardo's mind
that he might before his death receive the longed-for security
concerning his library: that it should not be merged in another
collection; that it should not be transferred to a body of monks, and be
called by the name of a monastery; but that it should remain for ever
the Bardi Library, for the use of Florentines.  For the old habit of
trusting in the Medici could not die out while their influence was still
the strongest lever in the State; and Tito, once possessing the ear of
the Cardinal Giovanni de' Medici, might do more even than Messer
Bernardo towards winning the desired interest, for he could demonstrate
to a learned audience the peculiar value of Bardi's collection.  Tito
himself talked sanguinely of such a result, willing to cheer the old
man, and conscious that Romola repaid those gentle words to her father
with a sort of adoration that no direct tribute to herself could have
won from her.

This question of the library was the subject of more than one discussion
with Bernardo del Nero when Christmas was turned and the prospect of the
marriage was becoming near--but always out of Bardo's hearing.  For
Bardo nursed a vague belief, which they dared not disturb, that his
property, apart from the library, was adequate to meet all demands.  He
would not even, except under a momentary pressure of angry despondency,
admit to himself that the will by which he had disinherited Dino would
leave Romola the heir of nothing but debts; or that he needed anything
from patronage beyond the security that a separate locality should be
assigned to his library, in return for a deed of gift by which he made
it over to the Florentine Republic.

"My opinion is," said Bernardo to Romola, in a consultation they had
under the loggia, "that since you are to be married, and Messer Tito
will have a competent income, we should begin to wind up the affairs,
and ascertain exactly the sum that would be necessary to save the
library from being touched, instead of letting the debts accumulate any
longer.  Your father needs nothing but his shred of mutton and his
macaroni every day, and I think Messer Tito may engage to supply that
for the years that remain; he can let it be in place of the
_morgen-cap_."

"Tito has always known that my life is bound up with my father's," said
Romola; "and he is better to my father than I am: he delights in making
him happy."

"Ah, he's not made of the same clay as other men, is he?" said Bernardo,
smiling.  "Thy father has thought of shutting woman's folly out of thee
by cramming thee with Greek and Latin; but thou hast been as ready to
believe in the first pair of bright eyes and the first soft words that
have come within reach of thee, as if thou couldst say nothing by heart
but Paternosters, like other Christian men's daughters."

"Now, godfather," said Romola, shaking her head playfully, "as if it
were only bright eyes and soft words that made me love Tito!  You know
better.  You know I love my father and you because you are both good,
and I love Tito too because he is so good.  I see it, I feel it, in
everything he says and does.  And if he is handsome, too, why should I
not love him the better for that?  It seems to me beauty is part of the
finished language by which goodness speaks.  You know _you_ must have
been a very handsome youth, godfather,"--she looked up with one of her
happy, loving smiles at the stately old man--"you were about as tall as
Tito, and you had very fine eyes; only you looked a little sterner and
prouder, and--"

"And Romola likes to have all the pride to herself?" said Bernardo, not
inaccessible to this pretty coaxing.  "However, it is well that in one
way Tito's demands are more modest than those of any Florentine husband
of fitting rank that we should have been likely to find for you; he
wants no dowry."

So it was settled in that way between Messer Bernardo del Nero, Romola,
and Tito.  Bardo assented with a wave of the hand when Bernardo told him
that he thought it would be well now to begin to sell property and clear
off debts; being accustomed to think of debts and property as a sort of
thick wood that his imagination never even penetrated, still less got
beyond.  And Tito set about winning Messer Bernardo's respect by
inquiring, with his ready faculty, into Florentine money-matters, the
secrets of the _Monti_ or public funds, the values of real property, and
the profits of banking.

"You will soon forget that Tito is not a Florentine, godfather," said
Romola.  "See how he is learning everything about Florence."

"It seems to me he is one of the _demoni_, who are of no particular
country, child," said Bernardo, smiling.  "His mind is a little too
nimble to be weighted with all the stuff we men carry about in our
hearts."

Romola smiled too, in happy confidence.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Note 1.  "Quando una donna e grande, ben formata, porta ben sua persona,
siede con una certa grandezza, parla con gravita, ride con modestia, e
finalmente getta quasi un odor di Regina; allora noi diciamo quella
donna pare una maesta, ella ha una maesta."--Firenzuola: _Della Bellezza
delle Donne_.



CHAPTER TWENTY.

THE DAY OF THE BETROTHAL.

It was the last week of the Carnival, and the streets of Florence were
at their fullest and noisiest: there were the masqued processions,
chanting songs, indispensable now they had once been introduced by
Lorenzo the Magnificent; there was the favourite rigoletto, or round
dance, footed "in piazza" under the blue frosty sky; there were
practical jokes of all sorts, from throwing comfits to throwing stones--
especially stones.  For the boys and striplings, always a strong element
in Florentine crowds, became at the height of Carnival-time as loud and
unmanageable as tree-crickets, and it was their immemorial privilege to
bar the way with poles to all passengers, until a tribute had been paid
towards furnishing those lovers of strong sensations with suppers and
bonfires: to conclude with the standing entertainment of stone-throwing,
which was not entirely monotonous, since the consequent maiming was
various, and it was not always a single person who was killed.  So that
the pleasures of the Carnival were of a checkered kind, and if a painter
were called upon to represent them truly, he would have to make a
picture in which there would be so much grossness and barbarity that it
must be turned with its face to the wall, except when it was taken down
for the grave historical purpose of justifying a reforming zeal which,
in ignorance of the facts, might be unfairly condemned for its
narrowness.  Still there was much of that more innocent picturesque
merriment which is never wanting among a people with quick animal
spirits and sensitive organs: there was not the heavy sottishness which
belongs to the thicker northern blood, nor the stealthy fierceness which
in the more southern regions of the peninsula makes the brawl lead to
the dagger-thrust.

It was the high morning, but the merry spirits of the Carnival were
still inclined to lounge and recapitulate the last night's jests, when
Tito Melema was walking at a brisk pace on the way to the Via de' Bardi.
Young Bernardo Dovizi, who now looks at us out of Raphael's portrait as
the keen-eyed Cardinal da Bibbiena, was with him; and, as they went,
they held animated talk about some subject that had evidently no
relation to the sights and sounds through which they were pushing their
way along the Por' Santa Maria.  Nevertheless, as they discussed,
smiled, and gesticulated, they both, from time to time, cast quick
glances around them, and at the turning towards the Lung' Arno, leading
to the Ponte Rubaconte, Tito had become aware, in one of these rapid
surveys, that there was some one not far off him by whom he very much
desired not to be recognised at that moment.  His time and thoughts were
thoroughly preoccupied, for he was looking forward to a unique occasion
in his life: he was preparing for his betrothal, which was to take place
on the evening of this very day.  The ceremony had been resolved upon
rather suddenly; for although preparations towards the marriage had been
going forward for some time--chiefly in the application of Tito's
florins to the fitting up of rooms in Bardo's dwelling, which, the
library excepted, had always been scantily furnished--it had been
intended to defer both the betrothal and the marriage until after
Easter, when Tito's year of probation, insisted on by Bernardo del Nero,
would have been complete.  But when an express proposition had come,
that Tito should follow the Cardinal Giovanni to Rome to help Bernardo
Dovizi with his superior knowledge of Greek in arranging a library, and
there was no possibility of declining what lay so plainly on the road to
advancement, he had become urgent in his entreaties that the betrothal
might take place before his departure: there would be the less delay
before the marriage on his return, and it would be less painful to part
if he and Romola were outwardly as well as inwardly pledged to each
other--if he had a claim which defied Messer Bernardo or any one else to
nullify it.  For the betrothal, at which rings were exchanged and mutual
contracts were signed, made more than half the legality of marriage, to
be completed on a separate occasion by the nuptial benediction.
Romola's feeling had met Tito's in this wish, and the consent of the
elders had been won.

And now Tito was hastening, amidst arrangements for his departure the
next day, to snatch a morning visit to Romola, to say and hear any last
words that were needful to be said before their meeting for the
betrothal in the evening.  It was not a time when any recognition could
be pleasant that was at all likely to detain him; still less a
recognition by Tessa.  And it was unmistakably Tessa whom he had caught
sight of moving along, with a timid and forlorn look, towards that very
turn of the Lung' Arno which he was just rounding.  As he continued his
talk with the young Dovizi, he had an uncomfortable undercurrent of
consciousness which told him that Tessa had seen him and would certainly
follow him: there was no escaping her along this direct road by the
Arno, and over the Ponte Rubaconte.  But she would not dare to speak to
him or approach him while he was not alone, and he would continue to
keep Dovizi with him till they reached Bardo's door.  He quickened his
pace, and took up new threads of talk; but all the while the sense that
Tessa was behind him, though he had no physical evidence of the fact,
grew stronger and stronger; it was very irritating--perhaps all the more
so because a certain tenderness and pity for the poor little thing made
the determination to escape without any visible notice of her, a not
altogether agreeable resource.  Yet Tito persevered and carried his
companion to the door, cleverly managing his "addio" without turning his
face in a direction where it was possible for him to see an importunate
pair of blue eyes; and as he went up the stone steps, he tried to get
rid of unpleasant thoughts by saying to himself that after all Tessa
might not have seen him, or, if she had, might not have followed him.

But--perhaps because that possibility could not be relied on strongly--
when the visit was over, he came out of the doorway with a quick step
and an air of unconsciousness as to anything that might be on his
right-hand or his left.  Our eyes are so constructed, however, that they
take in a wide angle without asking any leave of our will; and Tito knew
that there was a little figure in a white hood standing near the
doorway--knew it quite well, before he felt a hand laid on his arm.  It
was a real grasp, and not a light, timid touch; for poor Tessa, seeing
his rapid step, had started forward with a desperate effort.  But when
he stopped and turned towards her, her face wore a frightened look, as
if she dreaded the effect of her boldness.

"Tessa!" said Tito, with more sharpness in his voice than she had ever
heard in it before.  "Why are you here?  You must not follow me--you
must not stand about door-places waiting for me."

Her blue eyes widened with tears, and she said nothing.  Tito was afraid
of something worse than ridicule, if he were seen in the Via de' Bardi
with a girlish contadina looking pathetically at him.  It was a street
of high silent-looking dwellings, not of traffic; but Bernardo del Nero,
or some one almost as dangerous, might come up at any moment.  Even if
it had not been the day of his betrothal, the incident would have been
awkward and annoying.  Yet it would be brutal--it was impossible--to
drive Tessa away with harsh words.  That accursed folly of his with the
_cerretano_--that it should have lain buried in a quiet way for months,
and now start up before him as this unseasonable crop of vexation!  He
could not speak harshly, but he spoke hurriedly.

"Tessa, I cannot--must not talk to you here.  I will go on to the bridge
and wait for you there.  Follow me slowly."

He turned and walked fast to the Ponte Rubaconte, and there leaned
against the wall of one of the quaint little houses that rise at even
distances on the bridge, looking towards the way by which Tessa would
come.  It would have softened a much harder heart than Tito's to see the
little thing advancing with her round face much paled and saddened since
he had parted from it at the door of the "Nunziata."  Happily it was the
least frequented of the bridges, and there were scarcely any passengers
on it at this moment.  He lost no time in speaking as soon as she came
near him.

"Now, Tessa, I have very little time.  You must not cry.  Why did you
follow me this morning?  You must not do so again."

"I thought," said Tessa, speaking in a whisper, and struggling against a
sob that _would_ rise immediately at this new voice of Tito's--"I
thought you wouldn't be so long before you came to take care of me
again.  And the _patrigno_ beats me, and I can't bear it any longer.
And always when I come for a holiday I walk about to find you, and I
can't.  Oh, please don't send me away from you again!  It has been so
long, and I cry so now, because you never come to me.  I can't help it,
for the days are so long, and I don't mind about the goats and kids, or
anything--and I can't--"

The sobs came fast now, and the great tears.  Tito felt that he could
not do otherwise than comfort her.  Send her away--yes; that he _must_
do, at once.  But it was all the more impossible to tell her anything
that would leave her in a state of hopeless grief.  He saw new trouble
in the background, but the difficulty of the moment was too pressing for
him to weigh distant consequences.

"Tessa, my little one," he said, in his old caressing tones, "you must
not cry.  Bear with the cross _patrigno_ a little longer.  I will come
back to you.  But I'm going now to Rome--a long, long way off.  I shall
come back in a few weeks, and then I promise you to come and see you.
Promise me to be good and wait for me."

It was the well-remembered voice again, and the mere sound was half
enough to soothe Tessa.  She looked up at him with trusting eyes, that
still glittered with tears, sobbing all the while, in spite of her
utmost efforts to obey him.  Again he said, in a gentle voice--

"Promise me, my Tessa."

"Yes," she whispered.  "But you won't be long?"

"No, not long.  But I must _go now_.  And remember what I told you,
Tessa.  Nobody must know that you ever see me, else you will lose me for
ever.  And now, when I have left you, go straight home, and never follow
me again.  Wait till I come to you.  Good-bye, my little Tessa: I _will_
come."

There was no help for it; he must turn and leave her without looking
behind him to see how she bore it, for he had no time to spare.  When he
did look round he was in the Via de' Benci, where there was no seeing
what was happening on the bridge; but Tessa was too trusting and
obedient not to do just what he had told her.

Yes, the difficulty was at an end for that day; yet this return of Tessa
to him, at a moment when it was impossible for him to put an end to all
difficulty with her by undeceiving her, was an unpleasant incident to
carry in his memory.  But Tito's mind was just now thoroughly penetrated
with a hopeful first love, associated with all happy prospects
flattering to his ambition; and that future necessity of grieving Tessa
could be scarcely more to him than the far-off cry of some little
suffering animal buried in the thicket, to a merry cavalcade in the
sunny plain.  When, for the second time that day, Tito was hastening
across the Ponte Rubaconte, the thought of Tessa caused no perceptible
diminution of his happiness.  He was well muffled in his mantle, less,
perhaps, to protect him from the cold than from the additional notice
that would have been drawn upon him by his dainty apparel.  He leaped up
the stone steps by two at a time, and said hurriedly to Maso, who met
him--

"Where is the damigella?"

"In the library; she is quite ready, and Monna Brigida and Messer
Bernardo are already there with Ser Braccio, but none of the rest of the
company."

"Ask her to give me a few minutes alone; I will await her in the
_salotto_."

Tito entered a room which had been fitted up in the utmost contrast with
the half-pallid, half-sombre tints of the library.  The walls were
brightly frescoed with "caprices" of nymphs and loves sporting under the
blue among flowers and birds.  The only furniture besides the red
leather seats and the central table were two tall white vases, and a
young faun playing the flute, modelled by a promising youth named
Michelangelo Buonarotti.  It was a room that gave a sense of being in
the sunny open air.

Tito kept his mantle round him, and looked towards the door.  It was not
long before Romola entered, all white and gold, more than ever like a
tall lily.  Her white silk garment was bound by a golden girdle, which
fell with large tassels; and above that was the rippling gold of her
hair, surmounted by the white mist of her long veil, which was fastened
on her brow by a band of pearls, the gift of Bernardo del Nero, and was
now parted off her face so that it all floated backward.

"Regina mia!" said Tito, as he took her hand and kissed it, still
keeping his mantle round him.  He could not help going backward to look
at her again, while she stood in calm delight, with that exquisite
self-consciousness which rises under the gaze of admiring love.

"Romola, will you show me the next room now?" said Tito, checking
himself with the remembrance that the time might be short.  "You said I
should see it when you had arranged everything."

Without speaking, she led the way into a long narrow room, painted
brightly like the other, but only with birds and flowers.  The furniture
in it was all old; there were old faded objects for feminine use or
ornament, arranged in an open cabinet between the two narrow windows;
above the cabinet was the portrait of Romola's mother; and below this,
on the top of the cabinet, stood the crucifix which Romola had brought
from San Marco.

"I have brought something under my mantle," said Tito, smiling; and
throwing off the large loose garment, he showed the little tabernacle
which had been painted by Piero di Cosimo.  The painter had carried out
Tito's intention charmingly, and so far had atoned for his long delay.
"Do you know what this is for, my Romola?" added Tito, taking her by the
hand, and leading her towards the cabinet.  "It is a little shrine,
which is to hide away from you for ever that remembrancer of sadness.
You have done with sadness now; and we will bury all images of it--bury
them in a tomb of joy.  See!"

A slight quiver passed across Romola's face as Tito took hold of the
crucifix.  But she had no wish to prevent his purpose; on the contrary,
she herself wished to subdue certain importunate memories and
questionings which still flitted like unexplained shadows across her
happier thought.

He opened the triptych and placed the crucifix within the central space;
then closing it again, taking out the key, and setting the little
tabernacle in the spot where the crucifix had stood, said--

"Now, Romola, look and see if you are satisfied with the portraits old
Piero has made of us.  Is it not a dainty device? and the credit of
choosing it is mine."

"Ah! it is you--it is perfect!" said Romola, looking with moist joyful
eyes at the miniature Bacchus, with his purple clusters.  "And I am
Ariadne, and you are crowning me!  Yes, it is true, Tito; you have
crowned my poor life."

They held each other's hands while she spoke, and both looked at their
imaged selves.  But the reality was far more beautiful; she all
lily-white and golden, and he with his dark glowing beauty above the
purple red-bordered tunic.

"And it was our good strange Piero who painted it?" said Romola.  "Did
you put it into his head to paint me as Antigone, that he might have my
likeness for this?"

"No, it was he who made my getting leave for him to paint you and your
father, a condition of his doing this for me."

"Ah!  I see now what it was you gave up your precious ring for.  I
perceived you had some cunning plan to give me pleasure."

Tito did not blench.  Romola's little illusions about himself had long
ceased to cause him anything but satisfaction.  He only smiled and
said--

"I might have spared my ring; Piero will accept no money from me; he
thinks himself paid by painting you.  And now, while I am away, you will
look every day at those pretty symbols of our life together--the ship on
the calm sea, and the ivy that never withers, and those Loves that have
left off wounding us and shower soft petals that are like our kisses;
and the leopards and tigers, they are the troubles of your life that are
all quelled now; and the strange sea-monsters, with their merry eyes--
let us see--they are the dull passages in the heavy books, which have
begun to be amusing since we have sat by each other."

"Tito mio!" said Romola, in a half-laughing voice of love; "but you will
give me the key?" she added, holding out her hand for it.

"Not at all!" said Tito, with playful decision, opening his scarsella
and dropping in the little key.  "I shall drown it in the Arno."

"But if I ever wanted to look at the crucifix again?"

"Ah! for that very reason it is hidden--hidden by these images of youth
and joy."

He pressed a light kiss on her brow, and she said no more, ready to
submit, like all strong souls, when she felt no valid reason for
resistance.

And then they joined the waiting company, which made a dignified little
procession as it passed along the Ponte Rubaconte towards Santa Croce.
Slowly it passed, for Bardo, unaccustomed for years to leave his own
house, walked with a more timid step than usual; and that slow pace
suited well with the gouty dignity of Messer Bartolommeo Scala, who
graced the occasion by his presence, along with his daughter Alessandra.
It was customary to have very long troops of kindred and friends at the
_sposalizio_, or betrothal, and it had even been found necessary in time
past to limit the number by law to no more than _four hundred_--two
hundred on each side; for since the guests were all feasted after this
initial ceremony, as well as after the _nozze_, or marriage, the very
first stage of matrimony had become a ruinous expense, as that scholarly
Benedict, Leonardo Bruno, complained in his own case.  But Bardo, who in
his poverty had kept himself proudly free from any appearance of
claiming the advantages attached to a powerful family name, would have
no invitations given on the strength of mere friendship; and the modest
procession of twenty that followed the _sposi_ were, with three or four
exceptions, friends of Bardo's and Tito's selected on personal grounds.

Bernardo del Nero walked as a vanguard before Bardo, who was led on the
right by Tito, while Romola held her father's other hand.  Bardo had
himself been married at Santa Croce, and had insisted on Romola's being
betrothed and married there, rather than in the little church of Santa
Lucia close by their house, because he had a complete mental vision of
the grand church where he hoped that a burial might be granted him among
the Florentines who had deserved well.  Happily the way was short and
direct, and lay aloof from the loudest riot of the Carnival, if only
they could return before any dances or shows began in the great piazza
of Santa Croce.  The west was red as they passed the bridge, and shed a
mellow light on the pretty procession, which had a touch of solemnity in
the presence of the blind father.  But when the ceremony was over, and
Tito and Romola came out on to the broad steps of the church, with the
golden links of destiny on their fingers, the evening had deepened into
struggling starlight, and the servants had their torches lit.

While they came out, a strange dreary chant, as of a _Miserere_, met
their ears, and they saw that at the extreme end of the piazza there
seemed to be a stream of people impelled by something approaching from
the Borgo de' Greci.

"It is one of their masqued processions, I suppose," said Tito, who was
now alone with Romola, while Bernardo took charge of Bardo.

And as he spoke there came slowly into view, at a height far above the
heads of the onlookers, a huge and ghastly image of Winged Time with his
scythe and hour-glass, surrounded by his winged children, the Hours.  He
was mounted on a high car completely covered with black, and the
bullocks that drew the car were also covered with black, their horns
alone standing out white above the gloom; so that in the sombre shadow
of the houses it seemed to those at a distance as if Time and his
children were apparitions floating through the air.  And behind them
came what looked like a troop of the sheeted dead gliding above
blackness.  And as they glided slowly, they chanted in a wailing strain.

A cold horror seized on Romola, for at the first moment it seemed as if
her brother's vision, which could never be effaced from her mind, was
being half fulfilled.  She clung to Tito, who, divining what was in her
thoughts, said--

"What dismal fooling sometimes pleases your Florentines!  Doubtless this
is an invention of Piero di Cosimo, who loves such grim merriment."

"Tito, I wish it had not happened.  It will deepen the images of that
vision which I would fain be rid of."

"Nay, Romola, you will look only at the images of our happiness now.  I
have locked all sadness away from you."

"But it is still there--it is only hidden," said Romola, in a low tone,
hardly conscious that she spoke.

"See, they are all gone now!" said Tito.  "You will forget this ghastly
mummery when we are in the light, and can see each other's eyes.  My
Ariadne must never look backward now--only forward to Easter, when she
will triumph with her Care-dispeller."



PART TWO.



CHAPTER TWENTY ONE.

FLORENCE EXPECTS A GUEST.

It was the 17th of November 1494: more than eighteen months since Tito
and Romola had been finally united in the joyous Easter time, and had
had a rainbow-tinted shower of comfits thrown over them, after the
ancient Greek fashion, in token that the heavens would shower sweets on
them through all their double life.

Since that Easter a great change had come over the prospects of
Florence; and as in the tree that bears a myriad of blossoms, each
single bud with its fruit is dependent on the primary circulation of the
sap, so the fortunes of Tito and Romola were dependent on certain grand
political and social conditions which made an epoch in the history of
Italy.

In this very November, little more than a week ago, the spirit of the
old centuries seemed to have re-entered the breasts of Florentines.  The
great bell in the palace tower had rung out the hammer-sound of alarm,
and the people had mustered with their rusty arms, their tools and
impromptu cudgels, to drive out the Medici.  The gate of San Gallo had
been fairly shut on the arrogant, exasperating Piero, galloping away
towards Bologna with his hired horsemen frightened behind him, and shut
on his keener young brother, the cardinal, escaping in the disguise of a
Franciscan monk: a price had been set on both their heads.  After that,
there had been some sacking of houses, according to old precedent; the
ignominious images, painted on the public buildings, of the men who had
conspired against the Medici in days gone by, were effaced; the exiled
enemies of the Medici were invited home.  The half-fledged tyrants were
fairly out of their splendid nest in the Via Larga, and the Republic had
recovered the use of its will again.

But now, a week later, the great palace in the Via Larga had been
prepared for the reception of another tenant; and if drapery roofing the
streets with unwonted colour, if banners and hangings pouring out of the
windows, if carpets and tapestry stretched over all steps and pavement
on which exceptional feet might tread, were an unquestionable proof of
joy, Florence was very joyful in the expectation of its new guest.  The
stream of colour flowed from the palace in the Via Larga round by the
Cathedral, then by the great Piazza della Signoria, and across the Ponte
Vecchio to the Porta San Frediano--the gate that looks towards Pisa.
There, near the gate, a platform and canopy had been erected for the
Signoria; and Messer Luca Corsini, doctor of law, felt his heart
palpitating a little with the sense that he had a Latin oration to read;
and every chief elder in Florence had to make himself ready, with smooth
chin and well-lined silk lucco, to walk in procession; and the well-born
youths were looking at their rich new tunics after the French mode which
was to impress the stranger as having a peculiar grace when worn by
Florentines; and a large body of the clergy, from the archbishop in his
effulgence to the train of monks, black, white, and grey, were
consulting betimes in the morning how they should marshal themselves,
with their burden of relics and sacred banners and consecrated jewels,
that their movements might be adjusted to the expected arrival of the
illustrious visitor, at three o'clock in the afternoon.

An unexampled visitor!  For he had come through the passes of the Alps
with such an army as Italy had not seen before: with thousands of
terrible Swiss, well used to fight for love and hatred as well as for
hire; with a host of gallant cavaliers proud of a name; with an
unprecedented infantry, in which every man in a hundred carried an
arquebus; nay, with cannon of bronze, shooting not stones but iron
balls, drawn not by bullocks but by horses, and capable of firing a
second time before a city could mend the breach made by the first ball.
Some compared the new-comer to Charlemagne, reputed rebuilder of
Florence, welcome conqueror of degenerate kings, regulator and
benefactor of the Church, some preferred the comparison to Cyrus,
liberator of the chosen people, restorer of the Temple.  For he had come
across the Alps with the most glorious projects: he was to march through
Italy amidst the jubilees of a grateful and admiring people; he was to
satisfy all conflicting complaints at Rome; he was to take possession,
by virtue of hereditary right and a little fighting, of the kingdom of
Naples; and from that convenient starting-point he was to set out on the
conquest of the Turks, who were partly to be cut to pieces and partly
converted to the faith of Christ.  It was a scheme that seemed to befit
the Most Christian King, head of a nation which, thanks to the devices
of a subtle Louis the Eleventh who had died in much fright as to his
personal prospects ten years before, had become the strongest of
Christian monarchies; and this antitype of Cyrus and Charlemagne was no
other than the son of that subtle Louis--the young Charles the Eighth of
France.

Surely, on a general statement, hardly anything could seem more
grandiose, or fitter to revive in the breasts of men the memory of great
dispensations by which new strata had been laid in the history of
mankind.  And there was a very widely spread conviction that the advent
of the French king and his army into Italy was one of those events at
which marble statues might well be believed to perspire, phantasmal
fiery warriors to fight in the air, and quadrupeds to bring forth
monstrous births--that it did not belong to the usual order of
Providence, but was in a peculiar sense the work of God.  It was a
conviction that rested less on the necessarily momentous character of a
powerful foreign invasion than on certain moral emotions to which the
aspect of the times gave the form of presentiments: emotions which had
found a very remarkable utterance in the voice of a single man.

That man was Fra Girolamo Savonarola, Prior of the Dominican convent of
San Marco in Florence.  On a September morning, when men's ears were
ringing with the news that the French army had entered Italy, he had
preached in the Cathedral of Florence from the text, "Behold I, even I,
do bring a flood of waters upon the earth."  He believed it was by
supreme guidance that he had reached just so far in his exposition of
Genesis the previous Lent; and he believed the "flood of water"--emblem
at once of avenging wrath and purifying mercy--to be the divinely--
indicated symbol of the French army.  His audience, some of whom were
held to be among the choicest spirits of the age--the most cultivated
men in the most cultivated of Italian cities--believed it too, and
listened with shuddering awe.  For this man had a power rarely
paralleled, of impressing his beliefs on others, and of swaying very
various minds.  And as long as four years ago he had proclaimed from the
chief pulpit of Florence that a scourge was about to descend on Italy,
and that by this scourge the Church was to be purified.  Savonarola
appeared to believe, and his hearers more or less waveringly believed,
that he had a mission like that of the Hebrew prophets, and that the
Florentines amongst whom his message was delivered were in some sense a
second chosen people.  The idea of prophetic gifts was not a remote one
in that age: seers of visions, circumstantial heralds of things to be,
were far from uncommon either outside or inside the cloister; but this
very fact made Savonarola stand out the more conspicuously as a grand
exception.  While in others the gift of prophecy was very much like a
farthing candle illuminating small corners of human destiny with
prophetic gossip, in Savonarola it was like a mighty beacon shining far
out for the warning and guidance of men.  And to some of the soberest
minds the supernatural character of his insight into the future gathered
a strong attestation from the peculiar conditions of the age.

At the close of 1492, the year in which Lorenzo de' Medici died and Tito
Melema came as a wanderer to Florence, Italy was enjoying a peace and
prosperity unthreatened by any near and definite danger.  There was no
fear of famine, for the seasons had been plenteous in corn, and wine,
and oil; new palaces had been rising in all fair cities, new villas on
pleasant slopes and summits; and the men who had more than their share
of these good things were in no fear of the larger number who had less.
For the citizens' armour was getting rusty, and populations seemed to
have become tame, licking the hands of masters who paid for a ready-made
army when they wanted it, as they paid for goods of Smyrna.  Even the
fear of the Turk had ceased to be active, and the Pope found it more
immediately profitable to accept bribes from him for a little
prospective poisoning than to form plans either for conquering or for
converting him.

Altogether this world, with its partitioned empire and its roomy
universal Church, seemed to be a handsome establishment for the few who
were lucky or wise enough to reap the advantages of human folly: a world
in which lust and obscenity, lying and treachery, oppression and murder,
were pleasant, useful, and when properly managed, not dangerous.  And as
a sort of fringe or adornment to the substantial delights of tyranny,
avarice, and lasciviousness, there was the patronage of polite learning
and the fine arts, so that flattery could always be had in the choicest
Latin to be commanded at that time, and sublime artists were at hand to
paint the holy and the unclean with impartial skill.  The Church, it was
said, had never been so disgraced in its head, had never shown so few
signs of renovating, vital belief in its lower members; nevertheless it
was much more prosperous than in some past days.  The heavens were fair
and smiling above; and below there were no signs of earthquake.

Yet at that time, as we have seen, there was a man in Florence who for
two years and more had been preaching that a scourge was at hand; that
the world was certainly not framed for the lasting convenience of
hypocrites, libertines, and oppressors.  From the midst of those smiling
heavens he had seen a sword hanging--the sword of God's justice--which
was speedily to descend with purifying punishment on the Church and the
world.  In brilliant Ferrara, seventeen years before, the contradiction
between men's lives and their professed beliefs had pressed upon him
with a force that had been enough to destroy his appetite for the world,
and at the age of twenty-three had driven him into the cloister.  He
believed that God had committed to the Church the sacred lamp of truth
for the guidance and salvation of men, and he saw that the Church, in
its corruption, had become a sepulchre to hide the lamp.  As the years
went on scandals increased and multiplied, and hypocrisy seemed to have
given place to impudence.  Had the world, then, ceased to have a
righteous Ruler?  Was the Church finally forsaken?  No, assuredly: in
the Sacred Book there was a record of the past in which might be seen as
in a glass what would be in the days to come, and the book showed that
when the wickedness of the chosen people, type of the Christian Church,
had become crying, the judgments of God had descended on them.  Nay,
reason itself declared that vengeance was imminent, for what else would
suffice to turn men from their obstinacy in evil?  And unless the Church
were reclaimed, how could the promises be fulfilled, that the heathens
should be converted and the whole world become subject to the one true
law?  He had seen his belief reflected in visions--a mode of seeing
which had been frequent with him from his youth up.

But the real force of demonstration for Girolamo Savonarola lay in his
own burning indignation at the sight of wrong; in his fervent belief in
an Unseen Justice that would put an end to the wrong, and in an Unseen
Purity to which lying and uncleanness were an abomination.  To his
ardent, power-loving soul, believing in great ends, and longing to
achieve those ends by the exertion of its own strong will, the faith in
a supreme and righteous Ruler became one with the faith in a speedy
divine interposition that would punish and reclaim.

Meanwhile, under that splendid masquerade of dignities sacred and
secular which seemed to make the life of lucky Churchmen and princely
families so luxurious and amusing, there were certain conditions at work
which slowly tended to disturb the general festivity.  Ludovico Sforza--
copious in gallantry, splendid patron of an incomparable Leonardo da
Vinci--holding the ducal crown of Milan in his grasp, and wanting to put
it on his own head rather than let it rest on that of a feeble nephew
who would take very little to poison him, was much afraid of the
Spanish-born old King Ferdinand and the Crown Prince Alfonso of Naples,
who, not liking cruelty and treachery which were useless to themselves,
objected to the poisoning of a near relative for the advantage of a
Lombard usurper; the royalties of Naples again were afraid of their
suzerain, Pope Alexander Borgia; all three were anxiously watching
Florence, lest with its midway territory it should determine the game by
underhand backing; and all four, with every small state in Italy, were
afraid of Venice--Venice the cautious, the stable, and the strong, that
wanted to stretch its arms not only along both sides of the Adriatic but
across to the ports of the western coast, Lorenzo de' Medici, it was
thought, did much to prevent the fatal outbreak of such jealousies,
keeping up the old Florentine alliance with Naples and the Pope, and yet
persuading Milan that the alliance was for the general advantage.  But
young Piero de' Medici's rash vanity had quickly nullified the effect of
his father's wary policy, and Ludovico Sforza, roused to suspicion of a
league against him, thought of a move which would checkmate his
adversaries: he determined to invite the French king to march into
Italy, and, as heir of the house of Anjou, take possession of Naples.
Ambassadors--"orators," as they were called in those haranguing times--
went and came; a recusant cardinal, determined not to acknowledge a Pope
elected by bribery (and his own particular enemy), went and came also,
and seconded the invitation with hot rhetoric; and the young king seemed
to lend a willing ear.  So that in 1493 the rumour spread and became
louder and louder that Charles the Eighth of France was about to cross
the Alps with a mighty army; and the Italian populations, accustomed,
since Italy had ceased to be the heart of the Roman empire, to look for
an arbitrator from afar, began vaguely to regard his coming as a means
of avenging their wrongs and redressing their grievances.

And in that rumour Savonarola had heard the assurance that his prophecy
was being verified.  What was it that filled the ears of the prophets of
old but the distant tread of foreign armies, coming to do the work of
justice?  He no longer looked vaguely to the horizon for the coming
storm: he pointed to the rising cloud.  The French army was that new
deluge which was to purify the earth from iniquity; the French king,
Charles the Eighth, was the instrument elected by God, as Cyrus had been
of old, and all men who desired good rather than evil were to rejoice in
his coming.  For the scourge would fall destructively on the impenitent
alone.  Let any city of Italy, let Florence above all--Florence beloved
of God, since to its ear the warning voice had been specially sent--
repent and turn from its ways, like Nineveh of old, and the storm-cloud
would roll over it and leave only refreshing raindrops.

Fra Girolamo's word was powerful; yet now that the new Cyrus had already
been three months in Italy, and was not far from the gates of Florence,
his presence was expected there with mixed feelings, in which fear and
distrust certainly predominated.  At present it was not understood that
he had redressed any grievances; and the Florentines clearly had nothing
to thank him for.  He held their strong frontier fortresses, which Piero
de' Medici had given up to him without securing any honourable terms in
return; he had done nothing to quell the alarming revolt of Pisa, which
had been encouraged by his presence to throw off the Florentine yoke;
and "orators," even with a prophet at their head, could win no assurance
from him, except that he would settle everything when he was once within
the walls of Florence.  Still, there was the satisfaction of knowing
that the exasperating Piero de' Medici had been fairly pelted out for
the ignominious surrender of the fortresses, and in that act of energy
the spirit of the Republic had recovered some of its old fire.

The preparations for the equivocal guest were not entirely those of a
city resigned to submission.  Behind the bright drapery and banners
symbolical of joy, there were preparations of another sort made with
common accord by government and people.  Well hidden within walls there
were hired soldiers of the Republic, hastily called in from the
surrounding districts; there were old arms duly furbished, and sharp
tools and heavy cudgels laid carefully at hand, to be snatched up on
short notice; there were excellent boards and stakes to form barricades
upon occasion, and a good supply of stones to make a surprising hail
from the upper windows.  Above all, there were people very strongly in
the humour for fighting any personage who might be supposed to have
designs of hectoring over them, they having lately tasted that new
pleasure with much relish.  This humour was not diminished by the sight
of occasional parties of Frenchmen, coming beforehand to choose their
quarters, with a hawk, perhaps, on their left wrist, and, metaphorically
speaking, a piece of chalk in their right-hand to mark Italian doors
withal; especially as creditable historians imply that many sons of
France were at that time characterised by something approaching to a
swagger, which must have whetted the Florentine appetite for a little
stone-throwing.

And this was the temper of Florence on the morning of the 17th of
November 1494.



CHAPTER TWENTY TWO.

THE PRISONERS.

The sky was grey, but that made little difference in the Piazza del
Duomo, which was covered with its holiday sky of blue drapery, and its
constellations of yellow lilies and coats of arms.  The sheaves of
banners were unfurled at the angles of the Baptistery, but there was no
carpet yet on the steps of the Duomo, for the marble was being trodden
by numerous feet that were not at all exceptional.  It was the hour of
the Advent sermons, and the very same reasons which had flushed the
streets with holiday colour were reasons why the preaching in the Duomo
could least of all be dispensed with.

But not all the feet in the Piazza were hastening towards the steps.
People of high and low degree were moving to and fro with the brisk pace
of men who had errands before them; groups of talkers were thickly
scattered, some willing to be late for the sermon, and others content
not to hear it at all.

The expression on the faces of these apparent loungers was not that of
men who are enjoying the pleasant laziness of an opening holiday.  Some
were in close and eager discussion; others were listening with keen
interest to a single spokesman, and yet from time to time turned round
with a scanning glance at any new passer-by.  At the corner, looking
towards the Via de' Cerretani--just where the artificial rainbow light
of the Piazza ceased, and the grey morning fell on the sombre stone
houses--there was a remarkable cluster of the working people, most of
them bearing on their dress or persons the signs of their daily labour,
and almost all of them carrying some weapon, or some tool which might
serve as a weapon upon occasion.  Standing in the grey light of the
street, with bare brawny arms and soiled garments, they made all the
more striking the transition from the brightness of the Piazza.  They
were listening to the thin notary, Ser Cioni, who had just paused on his
way to the Duomo.  His biting words could get only a contemptuous
reception two years and a half before in the Mercato, but now he spoke
with the more complacent humour of a man whose party is uppermost, and
who is conscious of some influence with the people.

"Never talk to me," he was saying, in his incisive voice, "never talk to
me of bloodthirsty Swiss or fierce French infantry: they might as well
be in the narrow passes of the mountains as in our streets; and peasants
have destroyed the finest armies of our condottieri in time past, when
they had once got them between steep precipices.  I tell you,
Florentines need be afraid of no army in their own streets."

"That's true, Ser Cioni," said a man whose arms and hands were
discoloured by crimson dye, which looked like blood-stains, and who had
a small hatchet stuck in his belt; "and those French cavaliers, who came
in squaring themselves in their smart doublets the other day, saw a
sample of the dinner we could serve up for them.  I was carrying my
cloth in Ognissanti, when I saw my fine Messeri going by, looking round
as if they thought the houses of the Vespucci and the Agli a poor pick
of lodgings for them, and eyeing us Florentines, like top-knotted cocks
as they are, as if they pitied us because we didn't know how to strut.
`Yes, my fine _Galli_,' says I, `stick out your stomachs; I've got a
meat-axe in my belt that will go inside you all the easier;' when
presently the old cow lowed, [Note 1] and I knew something had
happened--no matter what.  So I threw my cloth in at the first doorway,
and took hold of my meat-axe and ran after my fine cavaliers towards the
Vigna Nuova.  And, `What is it, Guccio?' said I, when he came up with
me.  `I think it's the Medici coming back,' said Guccio.  _Bembe_!  I
expected so!  And up we reared a barricade, and the Frenchmen looked
behind and saw themselves in a trap; and up comes a good swarm of our
_Ciompi_ [Note 2] and one of them with a big scythe he had in his hand
mowed off one of the fine cavalier's feathers:--it's true!  And the
lasses peppered a few stones down to frighten them.  However, Piero de'
Medici wasn't come after all; and it was a pity; for we'd have left him
neither legs nor wings to go away with again."

"Well spoken, Oddo," said a young butcher, with his knife at his belt;
"and it's my belief Piero will be a good while before he wants to come
back, for he looked as frightened as a hunted chicken, when we hustled
and pelted him in the piazza.  He's a coward, else he might have made a
better stand when he'd got his horsemen.  But we'll swallow no Medici
any more, whatever else the French king wants to make us swallow."

"But I like not those French cannon they talk of," said Goro, none the
less fat for two years' additional grievances.  "San Giovanni defend us!
If Messer Domeneddio means so well by us as your Frate says he does,
Ser Cioni, why shouldn't he have sent the French another way to Naples?"

"Ay, Goro," said the dyer; "that's a question worth putting.  Thou art
not such a pumpkin-head as I took thee for.  Why, they might have gone
to Naples by Bologna, eh, Ser Cioni? or if they'd gone to Arezzo--we
wouldn't have minded their going to Arezzo."

"Fools!  It will be for the good and glory of Florence," Ser Cioni
began.  But he was interrupted by the exclamation, "Look there!" which
burst from several voices at once, while the faces were all turned to a
party who were advancing along the Via de' Cerretani.

"It's Lorenzo Tornabuoni, and one of the French noblemen who are in his
house," said Ser Cioni, in some contempt at this interruption.  "He
pretends to look well satisfied--that deep Tornabuoni--but he's a
Medicean in his heart: mind that."

The advancing party was rather a brilliant one, for there was not only
the distinguished presence of Lorenzo Tornabuoni, and the splendid
costume of the Frenchman with his elaborately displayed white linen and
gorgeous embroidery; there were two other Florentines of high birth in
handsome dresses donned for the coming procession, and on the left-hand
of the Frenchman was a figure that was not to be eclipsed by any amount
of intention or brocade--a figure we have often seen before.  He wore
nothing but black, for he was in mourning; but the black was presently
to be covered by a red mantle, for he too was to walk in procession as
Latin Secretary to the Ten.  Tito Melema had become conspicuously
serviceable in the intercourse with the French guests, from his
familiarity with Southern Italy, and his readiness in the French tongue,
which he had spoken in his early youth; and he had paid more than one
visit to the French camp at Signa.  The lustre of good fortune was upon
him; he was smiling, listening, and explaining, with his usual graceful
unpretentious ease, and only a very keen eye bent on studying him could
have marked a certain amount of change in him which was not to be
accounted for by the lapse of eighteen months.  It was that change which
comes from the final departure of moral youthfulness--from the distinct
self-conscious adoption of a part in life.  The lines of the face were
as soft as ever, the eyes as pellucid; but something was gone--something
as indefinable as the changes in the morning twilight.

The Frenchman was gathering instructions concerning ceremonial before
riding back to Signa, and now he was going to have a final survey of the
Piazza del Duomo, where the royal procession was to pause for religious
purposes.  The distinguished party attracted the notice of all eyes as
it entered the piazza, but the gaze was not entirely cordial and
admiring; there were remarks not altogether allusive and mysterious to
the Frenchman's hoof-shaped shoes--delicate flattery of royal
superfluity in toes; and there was no care that certain snarlings at
"Mediceans" should be strictly inaudible.  But Lorenzo Tornabuoni
possessed that power of dissembling annoyance which is demanded in a man
who courts popularity, and Tito, besides his natural disposition to
overcome ill-will by good-humour, had the unimpassioned feeling of the
alien towards names and details that move the deepest passions of the
native.

Arrived where they could get a good oblique view of the Duomo, the party
paused.  The festoons and devices placed over the central doorway
excited some demur, and Tornabuoni beckoned to Piero di Cosimo, who, as
was usual with him at this hour, was lounging in front of Nello's shop.
There was soon an animated discussion, and it became highly amusing from
the Frenchman's astonishment at Picro's odd pungency of statement, which
Tito translated literally.  Even snarling onlookers became curious, and
their faces began to wear the half-smiling, half-humiliated expression
of people who are not within hearing of the joke which is producing
infectious laughter.  It was a delightful moment for Tito, for he was
the only one of the party who could have made so amusing an interpreter,
and without any disposition to triumphant self-gratulation he revelled
in the sense that he was an object of liking--he basked in approving
glances.  The rainbow light fell about the laughing group, and the grave
church-goers had all disappeared within the walls.  It seemed as if the
piazza had been decorated for a real Florentine holiday.

Meanwhile in the grey light of the unadorned streets there were
on-comers who made no show of linen and brocade, and whose humour was
far from merry.  Here, too, the French dress and hoofed shoes were
conspicuous, but they were being pressed upon by a larger and larger
number of non-admiring Florentines.  In the van of the crowd were three
men in scanty clothing; each had his hands bound together by a cord, and
a rope was fastened round his neck and body, in such a way that he who
held the extremity of the rope might easily check any rebellious
movement by the threat of throttling.  The men who held the ropes were
French soldiers, and by broken Italian phrases and strokes from the
knotted end of the rope, they from time to time stimulated their
prisoners to beg.  Two of them were obedient, and to every Florentine
they had encountered had held out their bound hands and said in piteous
tones--

"For the love of God and the Holy Madonna, give us something towards our
ransom!  We are Tuscans: we were made prisoners in Lunigiana."

But the third man remained obstinately silent under all the strokes from
the knotted cord.  He was very different in aspect from his two
fellow-prisoners.  They were young and hardy, and, in the scant clothing
which the avarice of their captors had left them, looked like vulgar,
sturdy mendicants.  But he had passed the boundary of old age, and could
hardly be less than four or five and sixty.  His beard, which had grown
long in neglect, and the hair which fell thick and straight round his
baldness, were nearly white.  His thickset figure was still firm and
upright, though emaciated, and seemed to express energy in spite of
age--an expression that was partly carried out in the dark eyes and
strong dark eyebrows, which had a strangely isolated intensity of colour
in the midst of his yellow, bloodless, deep-wrinkled face with its lank
grey hairs.  And yet there was something fitful in the eyes which
contradicted the occasional flash of energy: after looking round with
quick fierceness at windows and faces, they fell again with a lost and
wandering look.  But his lips were motionless, and he held his hands
resolutely down.  He would not beg.

This sight had been witnessed by the Florentines with growing
exasperation.  Many standing at their doors or passing quietly along had
at once given money--some in half-automatic response to an appeal in the
name of God, others in that unquestioning awe of the French soldiery
which had been created by the reports of their cruel warfare, and on
which the French themselves counted as a guarantee of immunity in their
acts of insolence.  But as the group had proceeded farther into the
heart of the city, that compliance had gradually disappeared, and the
soldiers found themselves escorted by a gathering troop of men and boys,
who kept up a chorus of exclamations sufficiently intelligible to
foreign ears without any interpreter.  The soldiers themselves began to
dislike their position, for, with a strong inclination to use their
weapons, they were checked by the necessity for keeping a secure hold on
their prisoners, and they were now hurrying along in the hope of finding
shelter in a hostelry.

"French dogs!"

"Bullock-feet!"

"Snatch their pikes from them!"

"Cut the cords and make them run for their prisoners.  They'll run as
fast as geese--don't you see they're web-footed?"  These were the cries
which the soldiers vaguely understood to be jeers, and probably threats.
But every one seemed disposed to give invitations of this spirited kind
rather than to act upon them.

"Santiddio! here's a sight!" said the dyer, as soon as he had divined
the meaning of the advancing tumult, "and the fools do nothing but hoot.
Come along!" he added, snatching his axe from his belt, and running to
join the crowd, followed by the butcher and all the rest of his
companions, except Goro, who hastily retreated up a narrow passage.

The sight of the dyer, running forward with blood-red arms and axe
uplifted, and with his cluster of rough companions behind him, had a
stimulating effect on the crowd.  Not that he did anything else than
pass beyond the soldiers and thrust himself well among his
fellow-citizens, flourishing his axe; but he served as a stirring symbol
of street-fighting, like the waving of a well-known gonfalon.  And the
first sign that fire was ready to burst out was something as rapid as a
little leaping tongue of flame: it was an act of the conjuror's impish
lad Lollo, who was dancing and jeering in front of the ingenuous boys
that made the majority of the crowd.  Lollo had no great compassion for
the prisoners, but being conscious of an excellent knife which was his
unfailing companion, it had seemed to him from the first that to jump
forward, cut a rope, and leap back again before the soldier who held it
could use his weapon, would be an amusing and dexterous piece of
mischief.  And now, when the people began to hoot and jostle more
vigorously, Lollo felt that his moment was come--he was close to the
eldest prisoner: in an instant he had cut the cord.

"Run, old one!" he piped in the prisoner's ear, as soon as the cord was
in two; and himself set the example of running as if he were helped
along with wings, like a scared fowl.

The prisoner's sensations were not too slow for him to seize the
opportunity: the idea of escape had been continually present with him,
and he had gathered fresh hope from the temper of the crowd.  He ran at
once; but his speed would hardly have sufficed for him if the
Florentines had not instantaneously rushed between him and his captor.
He ran on into the piazza, but he quickly heard the tramp of feet behind
him, for the other two prisoners had been released, and the soldiers
were struggling and fighting their way after them, in such tardigrade
fashion as their hoof-shaped shoes would allow--impeded, but not very
resolutely attacked, by the people.  One of the two younger prisoners
turned lip the Borgo di San Lorenzo, and thus made a partial diversion
of the hubbub; but the main struggle was still towards the piazza, where
all eyes were turned on it with alarmed curiosity.  The cause could not
be precisely guessed, for the French dress was screened by the impeding
crowd.

"An escape of prisoners," said Lorenzo Tornabuoni, as he and his party
turned round just against the steps of the Duomo, and saw a prisoner
rushing by them.  "The people are not content with having emptied the
Bargello the other day.  If there is no other authority in sight they
must fall on the sbirri and secure freedom to thieves.  Ah! there is a
French soldier: that is more serious."

The soldier he saw was struggling along on the north side of the piazza,
but the object of his pursuit had taken the other direction.  That
object was the eldest prisoner, who had wheeled round the Baptistery and
was running towards the Duomo, determined to take refuge in that
sanctuary rather than trust to his speed.  But in mounting the steps,
his foot received a shock; he was precipitated towards the group of
signori, whose backs were turned to him, and was only able to recover
his balance as he clutched one of them by the arm.

It was Tito Melema who felt that clutch.  He turned his head, and saw
the face of his adoptive father, Baldassarre Calvo, close to his own.

The two men looked at each other, silent as death: Baldassarre, with
dark fierceness and a tightening grip of the soiled worn hands on the
velvet-clad arm; Tito, with cheeks and lips all bloodless, fascinated by
terror.  It seemed a long while to them--it was but a moment.

The first sound Tito heard was the short laugh of Piero di Cosimo, who
stood close by him and was the only person that could see his face.

"Ha, ha!  I know what a ghost should be now."

"This is another escaped prisoner," said Lorenzo Tornabuoni.  "Who is
he, I wonder?"

"_Some madman, surely_," said Tito.

He hardly knew how the words had come to his lips: there are moments
when our passions speak and decide for us, and we seem to stand by and
wonder.  They carry in them an inspiration of crime, that in one instant
does the work of long premeditation.

The two men had not taken their eyes off each other, and it seemed to
Tito, when he had spoken, that some magical poison had darted from
Baldassarre's eyes, and that he felt it rushing through his veins.  But
the next instant the grasp on his arm had relaxed, and Baldassarre had
disappeared within the church.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Note 1.  "_La vacca muglia_" was the phrase for the sounding of the
great bell in the tower of the Palazzo Vecchio.

Note 2.  The poorer artisans connected with the wool trade--
wool-beaters, carders, washers, etcetera.



CHAPTER TWENTY THREE.

AFTER-THOUGHTS.

"You are easily frightened, though," said Piero, with another scornful
laugh.  "My portrait is not as good as the original.  But the old fellow
_had_ a tiger look: I must go into the Duomo and see him again."

"It is not pleasant to be laid hold of by a madman, if madman he be,"
said Lorenzo Tornabuoni, in polite excuse of Tito, "but perhaps he is
only a ruffian.  We shall hear.  I think we must see if we have
authority enough to stop this disturbance between our people and your
countrymen," he added, addressing the Frenchman.

They advanced toward the crowd with their swords drawn, all the quiet
spectators making an escort for them.  Tito went too: it was necessary
that he should know what others knew about Baldassarre, and the first
palsy of terror was being succeeded by the rapid devices to which mortal
danger will stimulate the timid.

The rabble of men and boys, more inclined to hoot at the soldier and
torment him than to receive or inflict any serious wounds, gave way at
the approach of signori with drawn swords, and the French soldier was
interrogated.  He and his companions had simply brought their prisoners
into the city that they might beg money for their ransom: two of the
prisoners were Tuscan soldiers taken in Lunigiana; the other, an elderly
man, was with a party of Genoese, with whom the French foragers had come
to blows near Fivizzano.  He might be mad, but he was harmless.  The
soldier knew no more, being unable to understand a word the old man
said.  Tito heard so far, but he was deaf to everything else till he was
specially addressed.  It was Tornabuoni who spoke.

"Will you go back with us, Melema?  Or, since Messere is going off to
Signa now, will you wisely follow the fashion of the times and go to
hear the Frate, who will be like the torrent at its height this morning?
It's what we must all do, you know, if we are to save our Medicean
skins.  _I_ should go if I had the leisure."

Tito's face had recovered its colour now, and he could make an effort to
speak with gaiety.

"Of course I am among the admirers of the inspired orator," he said,
smilingly; "but, unfortunately, I shall be occupied with the Segretario
till the time of the procession."

"_I_ am going into the Duomo to look at that savage old man again," said
Piero.

"Then have the charity to show him to one of the hospitals for
travellers, Piero mio," said Tornabuoni.  "The monks may find out
whether he wants putting into a cage."

The party separated, and Tito took his way to the Palazzo Vecchio, where
he was to find Bartolommeo Scala.  It was not a long walk, but, for
Tito, it was stretched out like the minutes of our morning dreams: the
short spaces of street and piazza held memories, and previsions, and
torturing fears, that might have made the history of months.  He felt as
if a serpent had begun to coil round his limbs.  Baldassarre living, and
in Florence, was a living revenge, which would no more rest than a
winding serpent would rest until it had crushed its prey.  It was not in
the nature of that man to let an injury pass unavenged: his love and his
hatred were of that passionate fervour which subjugates all the rest of
the being, and makes a man sacrifice himself to his passion as if it
were a deity to be worshipped with self-destruction.  Baldassarre had
relaxed his hold, and had disappeared.  Tito knew well how to interpret
that: it meant that the vengeance was to be studied that it might be
sure.  If he had not uttered those decisive words--"He is a madman"--if
he could have summoned up the state of mind, the courage, necessary for
avowing his recognition of Baldassarre, would not the risk have been
less?  He might have declared himself to have had what he believed to be
positive evidence of Baldassarre's death; and the only persons who could
ever have had positive knowledge to contradict him, were Fra Luca, who
was dead, and the crew of the companion galley, who had brought him the
news of the encounter with the pirates.  The chances were infinite
against Baldassarre's having met again with any one of that crew, and
Tito thought with bitterness that a timely, well-devised falsehood might
have saved him from any fatal consequences.  But to have told that
falsehood would have required perfect self-command in the moment of a
convulsive shock: he seemed to have spoken without any preconception:
the words had leaped forth like a sudden birth that had been begotten
and nourished in the darkness.

Tito was experiencing that inexorable law of human souls, that we
prepare ourselves for sudden deeds by the reiterated choice of good or
evil which gradually determines character.

There was but one chance for him now; the chance of Baldassarre's
failure in finding his revenge.  And--Tito grasped at a thought more
actively cruel than any he had ever encouraged before: might not his own
unpremeditated words have some truth in them?  Enough truth, at least,
to bear him out in his denial of any declaration Baldassarre might make
about him?  The old man looked strange and wild; with his eager heart
and brain, suffering was likely enough to have produced madness.  If it
were so, the vengeance that strove to inflict disgrace might be baffled.

But there was another form of vengeance not to be baffled by ingenious
lying.  Baldassarre belonged to a race to whom the thrust of the dagger
seems almost as natural an impulse as the outleap of the tiger's talons.
Tito shrank with shuddering dread from disgrace; but he had also that
physical dread which is inseparable from a soft pleasure-loving nature,
and which prevents a man from meeting wounds and death as a welcome
relief from disgrace.  His thoughts flew at once to some hidden
defensive armour that might save him from a vengeance which no subtlety
could parry.

He wondered at the power of the passionate fear that possessed him.  It
was as if he had been smitten with a blighting disease that had suddenly
turned the joyous sense of young life into pain.

There was still one resource open to Tito.  He might have turned back,
sought Baldassarre again, confessed everything to him--to Romola--to all
the world.  But he never thought of that.  The repentance which cuts off
all moorings to evil, demands something more than selfish fear.  He had
no sense that there was strength and safety in truth; the only strength
he trusted to lay in his ingenuity and his dissimulation.  Now that the
first shock, which had called up the traitorous signs of fear, was well
past, he hoped to be prepared for all emergencies by cool deceit--and
defensive armour.

It was a characteristic fact in Tito's experience at this crisis, that
no direct measures for ridding himself of Baldassarre ever occurred to
him.  All other possibilities passed through his mind, even to his own
flight from Florence; but he never thought of any scheme for removing
his enemy.  His dread generated no active malignity, and he would still
have been glad not to give pain to any mortal.  He had simply chosen to
make life easy to himself--to carry his human lot, if possible, in such
a way that it should pinch him nowhere; and the choice had, at various
times, landed him in unexpected positions.  The question now was, not
whether he should divide the common pressure of destiny with his
suffering fellow-men; it was whether all the resources of lying would
save him from being crushed by the consequences of that habitual choice.



CHAPTER TWENTY FOUR.

INSIDE THE DUO.

When Baldassarre, with his hands bound together, and the rope round his
neck and body, pushed his way behind the curtain, and saw the interior
of the Duomo before him, he gave a start of astonishment, and stood
still against the doorway.  He had expected to see a vast nave empty of
everything but lifeless emblems--side altars with candles unlit, dim
pictures, pale and rigid statues--with perhaps a few worshippers in the
distant choir following a monotonous chant.  That was the ordinary
aspect of churches to a man who never went into them with any religious
purpose.

And he saw, instead, a vast multitude of warm, living faces, upturned in
breathless silence towards the pulpit, at the angle between the nave and
the choir.  The multitude was of all ranks, from magistrates and dames
of gentle nurture to coarsely-clad artisans and country people.  In the
pulpit was a Dominican friar, with strong features and dark hair,
preaching with the crucifix in his hand.

For the first few minutes Baldassarre noted nothing of his preaching.
Silent as his entrance had been, some eyes near the doorway had been
turned on him with surprise and suspicion.  The rope indicated plainly
enough that he was an escaped prisoner, but in that case the church was
a sanctuary which he had a right to claim; his advanced years and look
of wild misery were fitted to excite pity rather than alarm; and as he
stood motionless, with eyes that soon wandered absently from the wide
scene before him to the pavement at his feet, those who had observed his
entrance presently ceased to regard him, and became absorbed again in
the stronger interest of listening to the sermon.

Among the eyes that had been turned towards him were Romola's: she had
entered late through one of the side doors and was so placed that she
had a full view of the main entrance.  She had looked long and
attentively at Baldassarre, for grey hairs made a peculiar appeal to
her, and the stamp of some unwonted suffering in the face, confirmed by
the cord round his neck, stirred in her those sensibilities towards the
sorrows of age, which her whole life had tended to develop.  She fancied
that his eyes had met hers in their first wandering gaze; but
Baldassarre had not, in reality, noted her; he had only had a startled
consciousness of the general scene, and the consciousness was a mere
flash that made no perceptible break in the fierce tumult of emotion
which the encounter with Tito had created.  Images from the past kept
urging themselves upon him like delirious visions strangely blended with
thirst and anguish.  No distinct thought for the future could shape
itself in the midst of that fiery passion: the nearest approach to such
thought was the bitter sense of enfeebled powers, and a vague
determination to universal distrust and suspicion.  Suddenly he felt
himself vibrating to loud tones, which seemed like the thundering echo
of his own passion.  A voice that penetrated his very marrow with its
accent of triumphant certitude was saying--"The day of vengeance is at
hand!"

Baldassarre quivered and looked up.  He was too distant to see more than
the general aspect of the preacher standing, with his right arm
outstretched, lifting up the crucifix; but he panted for the threatening
voice again as if it had been a promise of bliss.  There was a pause
before the preacher spoke again.  He gradually lowered his arm.  He
deposited the crucifix on the edge of the pulpit, and crossed his arms
over his breast, looking round at the multitude as if he would meet the
glance of every individual face.

"All ye in Florence are my witnesses, for I spoke not in a corner.  Ye
are my witnesses, that four years ago, when there were yet no signs of
war and tribulation, I preached the coming of the scourge.  I lifted up
my voice as a trumpet to the prelates and princes and people of Italy
and said, The cup of your iniquity is full.  Behold, the thunder of the
Lord is gathering, and it shall fall and break the cup, and your
iniquity, which seems to you as pleasant wine, shall be poured out upon
you, and shall be as molten lead.  And you, O priests, who say, Ha, ha!
there is no Presence in the sanctuary--the Shechinah is nought--the
Mercy-seat is bare: we may sin behind the veil, and who shall punish us?
To you, I said, the presence of God shall be revealed in his temple as
a consuming fire, and your sacred garments shall become a winding-sheet
of flame, and for sweet music there shall be shrieks and hissing, and
for soft couches there shall be thorns, and for the breath of wantons
shall come the pestilence.  Trust not in your gold and silver, trust not
in your high fortresses; for, though the walls were of iron, and the
fortresses of adamant, the Most High shall put terror into your hearts
and weakness into your councils, so that you shall be confounded and
flee like women.  He shall break in pieces mighty men without number,
and put others in their stead.  For God will no longer endure the
pollution of his sanctuary; he will thoroughly purge his Church.

"And forasmuch as it is written that God will do nothing but he
revealeth it to his servants the prophets, he has chosen me, his
unworthy servant, and made his purpose present to my soul in the living
word of the Scriptures, and in the deeds of his providence; and by the
ministry of angels he has revealed it to me in visions.  And his word
possesses me so that I am but as the branch of the forest when the wind
of heaven penetrates it, and it is not in me to keep silence, even
though I may be a derision to the scorner.  And for four years I have
preached in obedience to the Divine will: in the face of scoffing I have
preached three things, which the Lord has delivered to me: that _in
these times God will regenerate his Church_, and that _before the
regeneration must come the scourge over all Italy_, and that _these
things will come quickly_.

"But hypocrites who cloak their hatred of the truth with a show of love
have said to me, `Come now, Frate, leave your prophesyings: it is enough
to teach virtue.'  To these I answer: `Yes, you say in your hearts, God
lives afar off, and his word is as a parchment written by dead men, and
he deals not as in the days of old, rebuking the nations, and punishing
the oppressors, and smiting the unholy priests as he smote the sons of
Eli.  But I cry again in your ears: God is near and not afar off; his
judgments change not.  He is the God of armies; the strong men who go up
to battle are his ministers, even as the storm, and fire, and
pestilence.  He drives them by the breath of his angels, and they come
upon the chosen land which has forsaken the covenant.  And thou, O
Italy, art the chosen land; has not God placed his sanctuary within
thee, and thou hast polluted it?  Behold, the ministers of his wrath are
upon thee--they are at thy very doors!'"

Savonarola's voice had been rising in impassioned force up to this
point, when he became suddenly silent, let his hands fall and clasped
them quietly before him.  His silence, instead of being the signal for
small movements amongst his audience, seemed to be as strong a spell to
them as his voice.  Through the vast area of the cathedral men and women
sat with faces upturned, like breathing statues, till the voice was
heard again in clear low tones.

"Yet there is a pause--even as in the days when Jerusalem was destroyed
there was a pause that the children of God might flee from it.  There is
a stillness before the storm: lo, there is blackness above, but not a
leaf quakes: the winds are stayed, that the voice of God's warning may
be heard.  Hear it now, O Florence, chosen city in the chosen land!
Repent and forsake evil: do justice: love mercy: put away all
uncleanness from among you, that the spirit of truth and holiness may
fill your souls and breathe through all your streets and habitations,
and then the pestilence shall not enter, and the sword shall pass over
you and leave you unhurt.

"For the sword is hanging from the sky; it is quivering; it is about to
fall!  _The sword of God upon the earth, swift and sudden_!  Did I not
tell you, years ago, that I had beheld the vision and heard the voice?
And behold, it is fulfilled!  Is there not a king with his army at your
gates?  Does not the earth shake with the tread of horses and the wheels
of swift cannon?  Is there not a fierce multitude that can lay bare the
land as with a sharp razor?  I tell you the French king with his army is
the minister of God: God shall guide him as the hand guides a sharp
sickle, and the joints of the wicked shall melt before him, and they
shall be mown down as stubble: he that fleeth of them shall not flee
away, and he that escapeth of them shall not be delivered.  And the
tyrants who have made to themselves a throne out of the vices of the
multitude, and the unbelieving priests who traffic in the souls of men
and fill the very sanctuary with fornication, shall be hurled from their
soft couches into burning hell; and the pagans and they who sinned under
the old covenant shall stand aloof and say: `Lo, these men have brought
the stench of a new wickedness into the everlasting fire.'

"But thou, O Florence, take the offered mercy.  See! the Cross is held
out to you: come and be healed.  Which among the nations of Italy has
had a token like unto yours?  The tyrant is driven out from among you:
the men who held a bribe in their left-hand and a rod in the right are
gone forth, and no blood has been spilled.  And now put away every other
abomination from among you, and you shall be strong in the strength of
the living God.  Wash yourselves from the black pitch of your vices,
which have made you even as the heathens: put away the envy and hatred
that have made your city as a nest of wolves.  And there shall no harm
happen to you: and the passage of armies shall be to you as a flight of
birds, and rebellious Pisa shall be given to you again, and famine and
pestilence shall be far from your gates, and you shall be as a beacon
among the nations.  But, mark! while you suffer the accursed thing to
lie in the camp you shall be afflicted and tormented, even though a
remnant among you may be saved."

These admonitions and promises had been spoken in an incisive tone of
authority; but in the next sentence the preacher's voice melted into a
strain of entreaty.

"Listen, O people, over whom my heart yearns, as the heart of a mother
over the children she has travailed for!  God is my witness that but for
your sakes I would willingly live as a turtle in the depths of the
forest, singing low to my Beloved, who is mine and I am his.  For you I
toil, for you I languish, for you my nights are spent in watching, and
my soul melteth away for very heaviness.  O Lord, thou knowest I am
willing--I am ready.  Take me, stretch me on thy cross: let the wicked
who delight in blood, and rob the poor, and defile the temple of their
bodies, and harden themselves against thy mercy--let them wag their
heads and shoot out the lip at me: let the thorns press upon my brow,
and let my sweat be anguish--I desire to be made like thee in thy great
love.  But let me see the fruit of my travail--let this people be saved!
Let me see them clothed in purity: let me hear their voices rise in
concord as the voices of the angels: let them see no wisdom but in thy
eternal law, no beauty but in holiness.  Then they shall lead the way
before the nations, and the people from the four winds shall follow
them, and be gathered into the fold of the blessed.  For it is thy will,
O God, that the earth shall be converted unto thy law: it is thy will
that wickedness shall cease and love shall reign.  Come, O blessed
promise; and behold, I am willing--lay me on the altar: let my blood
flow and the fire consume me; but let my witness be remembered among
men, that iniquity shall not prosper for ever."  [See note at the end.]

During the last appeal, Savonarola had stretched out his arms and lifted
up his eyes to heaven; his strong voice had alternately trembled with
emotion and risen again in renewed energy; but the passion with which he
offered himself as a victim became at last too strong to allow of
further speech, and he ended in a sob.  Every changing tone, vibrating
through the audience, shook them into answering emotion.  There were
plenty among them who had very moderate faith in the Frate's prophetic
mission, and who in their cooler moments loved him little; nevertheless,
they too were carried along by the great wave of feeling which gathered
its force from sympathies that lay deeper than all theory.  A loud
responding sob rose at once from the wide multitude, while Savonarola
had fallen on his knees and buried his face in his mantle.  He felt in
that moment the rapture and glory of martyrdom without its agony.

In that great sob of the multitude Baldassarre's had mingled.  Among all
the human beings present, there was perhaps not one whose frame vibrated
more strongly than his to the tones and words of the preacher; but it
had vibrated like a harp of which all the strings had been wrenched away
except one.  That threat of a fiery inexorable vengeance--of a future
into which the hated sinner might be pursued and held by the avenger in
an eternal grapple, had come to him like the promise of an unquenchable
fountain to unquenchable thirst.  The doctrines of the sages, the old
contempt for priestly Superstitions, had fallen away from his soul like
a forgotten language: if he could have remembered them, what answer
could they have given to his great need like the answer given by this
voice of energetic conviction?  The thunder of denunciation fell on his
passion-wrought nerves with all the force of self-evidence: his thought
never went beyond it into questions--he was possessed by it as the
war-horse is possessed by the clash of sounds.  No word that was not a
threat touched his consciousness; he had no fibre to be thrilled by it.
But the fierce exultant delight to which he was moved by the idea of
perpetual vengeance found at once a climax and a relieving outburst in
the preacher's words of self-sacrifice.  To Baldassarre those words only
brought the vague triumphant sense that he too was devoting himself--
signing with his own blood the deed by which he gave himself over to an
unending fire, that would seem but coolness to his burning hatred.

"I rescued him--I cherished him--if I might clutch his heart-strings for
ever!  Come, O blessed promise!  Let my blood flow; let the fire consume
me!"

The one cord vibrated to its utmost.  Baldassarre clutched his own
palms, driving his long nails into them, and burst into a sob with the
rest.



CHAPTER TWENTY FIVE.

OUTSIDE THE DUOMO.

While Baldassarre was possessed by the voice of Savonarola, he had not
noticed that another man had entered through the doorway behind him, and
stood not far off observing him.  It was Piero di Cosimo, who took no
heed of the preaching, having come solely to look at the escaped
prisoner.  During the pause, in which the preacher and his audience had
given themselves up to inarticulate emotion, the new-comer advanced and
touched Baldassarre on the arm.  He looked round with the tears still
slowly rolling down his face, but with a vigorous sigh, as if he had
done with that outburst.  The painter spoke to him in a low tone--

"Shall I cut your cords for you?  I have heard how you were made
prisoner."

Baldassarre did not reply immediately; he glanced suspiciously at the
officious stranger.  At last he said, "If you will."

"Better come outside," said Piero.

Baldassarre again looked at him suspiciously; and Piero, partly guessing
his thought, smiled, took out a knife, and cut the cords.  He began to
think that the idea of the prisoner's madness was not improbable, there
was something so peculiar in the expression of his face.  "Well," he
thought, "if he does any mischief, he'll soon get tied up again.  The
poor devil shall have a chance, at least."

"You are afraid of me," he said again, in an undertone; "you don't want
to tell me anything about yourself."

Baldassarre was folding his arms in enjoyment of the long-absent
muscular sensation.  He answered Piero with a less suspicious look and a
tone which had some quiet decision in it.

"No, I have nothing to tell."

"As you please," said Piero, "but perhaps you want shelter, and may not
know how hospitable we Florentines are to visitors with torn doublets
and empty stomachs.  There's an hospital for poor travellers outside all
our gates, and, if you liked, I could put you in the way to one.
There's no danger from your French soldier.  He has been sent off."

Baldassarre nodded, and turned in silent acceptance of the offer, and he
and Piero left the church together.

"You wouldn't like to sit to me for your portrait, should you?" said
Piero, as they went along the Via dell' Oriuolo, on the way to the gate
of Santa Croce.  "I am a painter: I would give you money to get your
portrait."

The suspicion returned into Baldassarre's glance, as he looked at Piero,
and said decidedly, "No."

"Ah!" said the painter, curtly.  "Well, go straight on, and you'll find
the Porta Santa Croce, and outside it there's an hospital for
travellers.  So you'll not accept any service from me?"

"I give you thanks for what you have done already.  I need no more."

"It is well," said Piero, with a shrug, and they turned away from each
other.

"A mysterious old tiger!" thought the artist, "well worth painting.
Ugly--with deep lines--looking as if the plough and the harrow had gone
over his heart.  A fine contrast to my bland and smiling Messer Greco--
my _Bacco trionfante_, who has married the fair Antigone in
contradiction to all history and fitness.  Aha! his scholar's blood
curdled uncomfortably at the old fellow's clutch!"  When Piero
re-entered the Piazza del Duomo the multitude who had been listening to
Fra Girolamo were pouring out from all the doors, and the haste they
made to go on their several ways was a proof how important they held the
preaching which had detained them from the other occupations of the day.
The artist leaned against an angle of the Baptistery and watched the
departing crowd, delighting in the variety of the garb and of the keen
characteristic faces--faces such as Masaccio had painted more than fifty
years before: such as Domenico Ghirlandajo had not yet quite left off
painting.

This morning was a peculiar occasion, and the Frate's audience, always
multifarious, had represented even more completely than usual the
various classes and political parties of Florence.  There were men of
high birth, accustomed to public charges at home and abroad, who had
become newly conspicuous not only as enemies of the Medici and friends
of popular government, but as thorough Piagnoni, espousing to the utmost
the doctrines and practical teaching of the Frate, and frequenting San
Marco as the seat of another Samuel: some of them men of authoritative
and handsome presence, like Francesco Valori, and perhaps also of a hot
and arrogant temper, very much gratified by an immediate divine
authority for bringing about freedom in their own way; others, like
Soderini, with less of the ardent Piagnone, and more of the wise
politician.  There were men, also of family, like Piero Capponi, simply
brave undoctrinal lovers of a sober republican liberty, who preferred
fighting to arguing, and had no particular reasons for thinking any
ideas false that kept out the Medici and made room for public spirit.
At their elbows were doctors of law whose studies of Accursius and his
brethren had not so entirely consumed their ardour as to prevent them
from becoming enthusiastic Piagnoni: Messer Luca Corsini himself, for
example, who on a memorable occasion yet to come was to raise his
learned arms in street stone-throwing for the cause of religion,
freedom, and the Frate.  And among the dignities who carried their black
lucco or furred mantle with an air of habitual authority, there was an
abundant sprinkling of men with more contemplative and sensitive faces:
scholars inheriting such high names as Strozzi and Acciajoli, who were
already minded to take the cowl and join the community of San Marco;
artists, wrought to a new and higher ambition by the teaching of
Savonarola, like that young painter who had lately surpassed himself in
his fresco of the divine child on the wall of the Frate's bare cell--
unconscious yet that he would one day himself wear the tonsure and the
cowl, and be called Fra Bartolommeo.  There was the mystic poet Girolamo
Benevieni hastening, perhaps, to carry tidings of the beloved Frate's
speedy coming to his friend Pico della Mirandola, who was never to see
the light of another morning.  There were well-born women attired with
such scrupulous plainness that their more refined grace was the chief
distinction between them and their less aristocratic sisters.  There was
a predominant proportion of the genuine _popolani_ or middle class,
belonging both to the Major and Minor Arts, conscious of purses
threatened by war-taxes.  And more striking and various, perhaps, than
all the other classes of the Frate's disciples, there was the long
stream of poorer tradesmen and artisans, whose faith and hope in his
Divine message varied from the rude and undiscriminating trust in him as
the friend of the poor and the enemy of the luxurious oppressive rich,
to that eager tasting of all the subtleties of biblical interpretation
which takes a peculiarly strong hold on the sedentary artisan,
illuminating the long dim spaces beyond the board where he stitches,
with a pale flame that seems to him the light of Divine science.

But among these various disciples of the Frate were scattered many who
were not in the least his disciples.  Some were Mediceans who had
already, from motives of fear and policy, begun to show the presiding
spirit of the popular party a feigned deference.  Others were sincere
advocates of a free government, but regarded Savonarola simply as an
ambitious monk--half sagacious, half fanatical--who had made himself a
powerful instrument with the people, and must be accepted as an
important social fact.  There were even some of his bitter enemies:
members of the old aristocratic anti-Medicean party--determined to try
and get the reins once more tight in the hands of certain chief
families; or else licentious young men, who detested him as the killjoy
of Florence.  For the sermons in the Duomo had already become political
incidents, attracting the ears of curiosity and malice, as well as of
faith.  The men of ideas, like young Niccolo Macchiavelli, went to
observe and write reports to friends away in country villas; the men of
appetites, like Dolfo Spini, bent on hunting down the Frate, as a public
nuisance who made game scarce, went to feed their hatred and lie in wait
for grounds of accusation.

Perhaps, while no preacher ever had a more massive influence than
Savonarola, no preacher ever had more heterogeneous materials to work
upon.  And one secret of the massive influence lay in the highly mixed
character of his preaching.  Baldassarre, wrought into an ecstasy of
self-martyring revenge, was only an extreme case among the partial and
narrow sympathies of that audience.  In Savonarola's preaching there
were strains that appealed to the very finest susceptibilities of men's
natures, and there were elements that gratified low egoism, tickled
gossiping curiosity, and fascinated timorous superstition.  His need of
personal predominance, his labyrinthine allegorical interpretations of
the Scriptures, his enigmatic visions, and his false certitude about the
Divine intentions, never ceased, in his own large soul, to be ennobled
by that fervid piety, that passionate sense of the infinite, that active
sympathy, that clear-sighted demand for the subjection of selfish
interests to the general good, which he had in common with the greatest
of mankind.  But for the mass of his audience all the pregnancy of his
preaching lay in his strong assertion of supernatural claims, in his
denunciatory visions, in the false certitude which gave his sermons the
interest of a political bulletin; and having once held that audience in
his mastery, it was necessary to his nature--it was necessary for their
welfare--that he should _keep_ the mastery.  The effect was inevitable.
No man ever struggled to retain power over a mixed multitude without
suffering vitiation; his standard must be their lower needs and not his
own best insight.

The mysteries of human character have seldom been presented in a way
more fitted to check the judgments of facile knowingness than in
Girolamo Savonarola; but we can give him a reverence that needs no
shutting of the eyes to fact, if we regard his life as a drama in which
there were great inward modifications accompanying the outward changes.
And up to this period, when his more direct action on political affairs
had only just begun, it is probable that his imperious need of
ascendancy had burned undiscernibly in the strong flame of his zeal for
God and man.

It was the fashion of old, when an ox was led out for sacrifice to
Jupiter, to chalk the dark spots, and give the offering a false show of
unblemished whiteness.  Let us fling away the chalk, and boldly say,--
the victim is spotted, but it is not therefore in vain that his mighty
heart is laid on the altar of men's highest hopes.



CHAPTER TWENTY SIX.

THE GARMENT OF FEAR.

At six o'clock that evening most people in Florence were glad the
entrance of the new Charlemagne was fairly over.  Doubtless when the
roll of drums, the blast of trumpets, and the tramp of horses along the
Pisan road began to mingle with the pealing of the excited bells, it was
a grand moment for those who were stationed on turreted roofs, and could
see the long-winding terrible pomp on the background of the green hills
and valley.  There was no sunshine to light up the splendour of banners,
and spears, and plumes, and silken surcoats, but there was no thick
cloud of dust to hide it, and as the picked troops advanced into close
view, they could be seen all the more distinctly for the absence of
dancing glitter.  Tall and tough Scotch archers, Swiss halberdiers
fierce and ponderous, nimble Gascons ready to wheel and climb, cavalry
in which each man looked like a knight-errant with his indomitable spear
and charger--it was satisfactory to be assured that they would injure
nobody but the enemies of God!  With that confidence at heart it was a
less dubious pleasure to look at the array of strength and splendour in
nobles and knights, and youthful pages of choice lineage--at the bossed
and jewelled sword-hilts, at the satin scarfs embroidered with strange
symbolical devices of pious or gallant meaning, at the gold chains and
jewelled aigrettes, at the gorgeous horse-trappings and brocaded
mantles, and at the transcendent canopy carried by select youths above
the head of the Most Christian King.  To sum up with an old diarist,
whose spelling and diction halted a little behind the wonders of this
royal visit,--"_fu gran magnificenza_."

But for the Signoria, who had been waiting on their platform against the
gates, and had to march out at the right moment, with their orator in
front of them, to meet the mighty guest, the grandeur of the scene had
been somewhat screened by unpleasant sensations.  If Messer Luca Corsini
could have had a brief Latin welcome depending from his mouth in legible
characters, it would have been less confusing when the rain came on, and
created an impatience in men and horses that broke off the delivery of
his well-studied periods, and reduced the representatives of the
scholarly city to offer a makeshift welcome in impromptu French.  But
that sudden confusion had created a great opportunity for Tito.  As one
of the secretaries he was among the officials who were stationed behind
the Signoria, and with whom these highest dignities were promiscuously
thrown when pressed upon by the horses.

"Somebody step forward and say a few words in French," said Soderini.
But no one of high importance chose to risk a second failure.  "You,
Francesco Gaddi--you can speak."  But Gaddi, distrusting his own
promptness, hung back, and pushing Tito, said, "You, Melema."

Tito stepped forward in an instant, and, with the air of profound
deference that came as naturally to him as walking, said the few needful
words in the name of the Signoria; then gave way gracefully, and let the
king pass on.  His presence of mind, which had failed him in the
terrible crisis of the morning, had been a ready instrument this time.
It was an excellent livery servant that never forsook him when danger
was not visible.  But when he was complimented on his opportune service,
he laughed it off as a thing of no moment, and to those who had not
witnessed it, let Gaddi have the credit of the improvised welcome.  No
wonder Tito was popular: the touchstone by which men try us is most
often their own vanity.

Other things besides the oratorical welcome had turned out rather worse
than had been expected.  If everything had happened according to
ingenious preconceptions, the Florentine procession of clergy and laity
would not have found their way choked up and been obliged to take a
makeshift course through the back streets, so as to meet the king at the
Cathedral only.  Also, if the young monarch under the canopy, seated on
his charger with his lance upon his thigh, had looked more like a
Charlemagne and less like a hastily modelled grotesque, the imagination
of his admirers would have been much assisted.  It might have been
wished that the scourge of Italian wickedness and "Champion of the
honour of women" had had a less miserable leg, and only the normal sum
of toes; that his mouth had been of a less reptilian width of slit, his
nose and head of a less exorbitant outline.  But the thin leg rested on
cloth of gold and pearls, and the face was only an interruption of a few
square inches in the midst of black velvet and gold, and the blaze of
rubies, and the brilliant tints of the embroidered and bepearled
canopy,--"_fu gran magnificenza_."

And the people had cried _Francia, Francia_! with an enthusiasm
proportioned to the splendour of the canopy which they had torn to
pieces as their spoil, according to immemorial custom; royal lips had
duly kissed the altar; and after all mischances the royal person and
retinue were lodged in the Palace of the Via Larga, the rest of the
nobles and gentry were dispersed among the great houses of Florence, and
the terrible soldiery were encamped in the Prato and other open
quarters.  The business of the day was ended.

But the streets still presented a surprising aspect, such as Florentines
had not seen before under the November stars.  Instead of a gloom
unbroken except by a lamp burning feebly here and there before a saintly
image at the street-corners, or by a stream of redder light from an open
doorway, there were lamps suspended at the windows of all houses, so
that men could walk along no less securely and commodiously than by
day,--_fu gran magnificenza_.

Along those illuminated streets Tito Melema was walking at about eight
o'clock in the evening, on his way homeward.  He had been exerting
himself throughout the day under the pressure of hidden anxieties, and
had at last made his escape unnoticed from the midst of after-supper
gaiety.  Once at leisure thoroughly to face and consider his
circumstances, he hoped that he could so adjust himself to them and to
all probabilities as to get rid of his childish fear.  If he had only
not been wanting in the presence of mind necessary to recognise
Baldassarre under that surprise!--it would have been happier for him on
all accounts; for he still winced under the sense that he was
deliberately inflicting suffering on his father: he would very much have
preferred that Baldassarre should be prosperous and happy.  But he had
left himself no second path now: there could be no conflict any longer:
the only thing he had to do was to take care of himself.

While these thoughts were in his mind he was advancing from the Piazza
di Santa Croce along the Via dei Benci, and as he neared the angle
turning into the Borgo Santa Croce his ear was struck by a music which
was not that of evening revelry, but of vigorous labour--the music of
the anvil.  Tito gave a slight start and quickened his pace, for the
sounds had suggested a welcome thought.  He knew that they came from the
workshop of Niccolo Caparra, famous resort of all Florentines who cared
for curious and beautiful iron-work.

"What makes the giant at work so late?" thought Tito.  "But so much the
better for me.  I can do that little bit of business to-night instead of
to-morrow morning."

Preoccupied as he was, he could not help pausing a moment in admiration
as he came in front of the workshop.  The wide doorway, standing at the
truncated angle of a great block or "isle" of houses, was surmounted by
a loggia roofed with fluted tiles, and supported by stone columns with
roughly carved capitals.  Against the red light framed in by the outline
of the fluted tiles and columns stood in black relief the grand figure
of Niccolo, with his huge arms in rhythmic rise and fall, first hiding
and then disclosing the profile of his firm mouth and powerful brow.
Two slighter ebony figures, one at the anvil, the other at the bellows,
served to set off his superior massiveness.

Tito darkened the doorway with a very different outline, standing in
silence, since it was useless to speak until Niccolo should deign to
pause and notice him.  That was not until the smith had beaten the head
of an axe to the due sharpness of edge and dismissed it from his anvil.
But in the meantime Tito had satisfied himself by a glance round the
shop that the object of which he was in search had not disappeared.

Niccolo gave an unceremonious but good-humoured nod as he turned from
the anvil and rested his hammer on his hip.

"What is it, Messer Tito?  Business?"

"Assuredly, Niccolo; else I should not have ventured to interrupt you
when you are working out of hours, since I take that as a sign that your
work is pressing."

"I've been at the same work all day--making axes and spear-heads.  And
every fool that has passed my shop has put his pumpkin-head in to say,
`Niccolo, wilt thou not come and see the King of France and his
soldiers?' and I've answered, `No: I don't want to see their faces--I
want to see their backs.'"

"Are you making arms for the citizens, then, Niccolo, that they may have
something better than rusty scythes and spits in case of an uproar?"

"We shall see.  Arms are good, and Florence is likely to want them.  The
Frate tells us we shall get Pisa again, and I hold with the Frate; but I
should be glad to know how the promise is to be fulfilled, if we don't
get plenty of good weapons forged?  The Frate sees a long way before
him; that I believe.  But he doesn't see birds caught with winking at
them, as some of our people try to make out.  He sees sense, and not
nonsense.  But you're a bit of a Medicean, Messer Tito Melema.  Ebbene!
so I've been myself in my time, before the cask began to run sour.
What's your business?"

"Simply to know the price of that fine coat of mail I saw hanging up
here the other day.  I want to buy it for a certain personage who needs
a protection of that sort under his doublet."

"Let him come and buy it himself, then," said Niccolo, bluntly.  "I'm
rather nice about what I sell, and whom I sell to.  I like to know who's
my customer."

"I know your scruples, Niccolo.  But that is only defensive armour: it
can hurt nobody."

"True: but it may make the man who wears it feel himself all the safer
if he should want to hurt somebody.  No, no; it's not my own work; but
it's fine work of Maso of Brescia; I should be loth for it to cover the
heart of a scoundrel.  I must know who is to wear it."

"Well, then, to be plain with you, Niccolo mio, I want it myself," said
Tito, knowing it was useless to try persuasion.  "The fact is, I am
likely to have a journey to take--and you know what journeying is in
these times.  You don't suspect _me_ of treason against the Republic?"

"No, I know no harm of you," said Niccolo, in his blunt way again.  "But
have you the money to pay for the coat?  For you've passed my shop often
enough to know my sign: you've seen the burning account-books.  I trust
nobody.  The price is twenty florins, and that's because it's
second-hand.  You're not likely to have so much money with you.  Let it
be till to-morrow."

"I happen to have the money," said Tito, who had been winning at play
the day before, and had not emptied his purse.  "I'll carry the armour
home with me."

Niccolo reached down the finely-wrought coat, which fell together into
little more than two handfuls.

"There, then," he said, when the florins had been told down on his palm.
"Take the coat.  It's made to cheat sword, or poniard, or arrow.  But,
for my part, I would never put such a thing on.  It's like carrying fear
about with one."

Niccolo's words had an unpleasant intensity of meaning for Tito.  But he
smiled and said--

"Ah, Niccolo, we scholars are all cowards.  Handling the pen doesn't
thicken the arm as your hammer-wielding does.  Addio!"

He folded the armour under his mantle, and hastened across the Ponte
Rubaconte.



CHAPTER TWENTY SEVEN.

THE YOUNG WIFE.

While Tito was hastening across the bridge with the new-bought armour
under his mantle, Romola was pacing up and down the old library,
thinking of him and longing for his return.

It was but a few fair faces that had not looked forth from windows that
day to see the entrance of the French king and his nobles.  One of the
few was Romola's.  She had been present at no festivities since her
father had died--died quite suddenly in his chair, three months before.

"Is not Tito coming to write?" he had said, when the bell had long ago
sounded the usual hour in the evening.  He had not asked before, from
dread of a negative; but Romola had seen by his listening face and
restless movements that nothing else was in his mind.

"No, father, he had to go to a supper at the cardinal's: you know he is
wanted so much by every one," she answered, in a tone of gentle excuse.

"Ah! then perhaps he will bring some positive word about the library;
the cardinal promised last week," said Bardo, apparently pacified by
this hope.

He was silent a little while; then, suddenly flushing, he said--

"I must go on without him, Romola.  Get the pen.  He has brought me no
new text to comment on; but I must say what I want to say about the New
Platonists.  I shall die and nothing will have been done.  Make haste,
my Romola."

"I am ready, father," she said, the next minute, holding the pen in her
hand.

But there was silence.  Romola took no note of this for a little while,
accustomed to pauses in dictation; and when at last she looked round
inquiringly, there was no change of attitude.

"I am quite ready, father!"

Still Bardo was silent, and his silence was never again broken.

Romola looked back on that hour with some indignation against herself,
because even with the first outburst of her sorrow there had mingled the
irrepressible thought, "Perhaps my life with Tito will be more perfect
now."

For the dream of a triple life with an undivided sum of happiness had
not been quite fulfilled.  The rainbow-tinted shower of sweets, to have
been perfectly typical, should have had some invisible seeds of
bitterness mingled with them; the crowned Ariadne, under the snowing
roses, had felt more and more the presence of unexpected thorns.  It was
not Tito's fault, Romola had continually assured herself.  He was still
all gentleness to her, and to her father also.  But it was in the nature
of things--she saw it clearly now--it was in the nature of things that
no one but herself could go on month after month, and year after year,
fulfilling patiently all her father's monotonous exacting demands.  Even
she, whose sympathy with her father had made all the passion and
religion of her young years, had not always been patient, had been
inwardly very rebellious.  It was true that before their marriage, and
even for some time after, Tito had seemed more unwearying than herself;
but then, of course, the effort had the ease of novelty.  We assume a
load with confident readiness, and up to a certain point the growing
irksomeness of pressure is tolerable; but at last the desire for relief
can no longer be resisted.  Romola said to herself that she had been
very foolish and ignorant in her girlish time: she was wiser now, and
would make no unfair demands on the man to whom she had given her best
woman's love and worship.  The breath of sadness that still cleaved to
her lot while she saw her father month after month sink from elation
into new disappointment as Tito gave him less and less of his time, and
made bland excuses for not continuing his own share of the joint work--
that sadness was no fault of Tito's, she said, but rather of their
inevitable destiny.  If he stayed less and less with her, why, that was
because they could hardly ever be alone.  His caresses were no less
tender: if she pleaded timidly on any one evening that he should stay
with her father instead of going to another engagement which was not
peremptory, he excused himself with such charming gaiety, he seemed to
linger about her with such fond playfulness before he could quit her,
that she could only feel a little heartache in the midst of her love,
and then go to her father and try to soften his vexation and
disappointment.  But all the while inwardly her imagination was busy
trying to see how Tito could be as good as she had thought he was, and
yet find it impossible to sacrifice those pleasures of society which
were necessarily more vivid to a bright creature like him than to the
common run of men.  She herself would have liked more gaiety, more
admiration: it was true, she gave it up willingly for her father's
sake--she would have given up much more than that for the sake even of a
slight wish on Tito's part.  It was clear that their natures differed
widely; but perhaps it was no more than the inherent difference between
man and woman, that made her affections more absorbing.  If there were
any other difference she tried to persuade herself that the inferiority
was on her side.  Tito was really kinder than she was, better tempered,
less proud and resentful; he had no angry retorts, he met all complaints
with perfect sweetness; he only escaped as quietly as he could from
things that were unpleasant.

It belongs to every large nature, when it is not under the immediate
power of some strong unquestioning emotion, to suspect itself, and doubt
the truth of its own impressions, conscious of possibilities beyond its
own horizon.  And Romola was urged to doubt herself the more by the
necessity of interpreting her disappointment in her life with Tito so as
to satisfy at once her love and her pride.  Disappointment?  Yes, there
was no other milder word that would tell the truth.  Perhaps all women
had to suffer the disappointment of ignorant hopes, if she only knew
their experience.  Still, there had been something peculiar in her lot:
her relation to her father had claimed unusual sacrifices from her
husband.  Tito had once thought that his love would make those
sacrifices easy; his love had not been great enough for that.  She was
not justified in resenting a self-delusion.  No! resentment must not
rise: all endurance seemed easy to Romola rather than a state of mind in
which she would admit to herself that Tito acted unworthily.  If she had
felt a new heartache in the solitary hours with her father through the
last months of his life, it had been by no inexcusable fault of her
husband's; and now--it was a hope that would make its presence felt even
in the first moments when her father's place was empty--there was no
longer any importunate claim to divide her from Tito; their young lives
would flow in one current, and their true marriage would begin.

But the sense of something like guilt towards her father in a hope that
grew out of his death, gave all the more force to the anxiety with which
she dwelt on the means of fulfilling his supreme wish.  That piety
towards his memory was all the atonement she could make now for a
thought that seemed akin to joy at his loss.  The laborious simple life,
pure from vulgar corrupting ambitions, embittered by the frustration of
the dearest hopes, imprisoned at last in total darkness--a long
seed-time without a harvest--was at an end now, and all that remained of
it besides the tablet in Sante Croce and the unfinished commentary on
Tito's text, was the collection of manuscripts and antiquities, the
fruit of half a century's toil and frugality.  The fulfilment of her
father's lifelong ambition about this library was a sacramental
obligation for Romola.

The precious relic was safe from creditors, for when the deficit towards
their payment had been ascertained, Bernardo del Nero, though he was far
from being among the wealthiest Florentines, had advanced the necessary
sum of about a thousand florins--a large sum in those days--accepting a
lien on the collection as a security.

"The State will repay me," he had said to Romola, making light of the
service, which had really cost him some inconvenience.  "If the cardinal
finds a building, as he seems to say he will, our Signoria may consent
to do the rest.  I have no children, I can afford the risk."

But within the last ten days all hopes in the Medici had come to an end:
and the famous Medicean collections in the Via Larga were themselves in
danger of dispersion.  French agents had already begun to see that such
very fine antique gems as Lorenzo had collected belonged by right to the
first nation in Europe; and the Florentine State, which had got
possession of the Medicean library, was likely to be glad of a customer
for it.  With a war to recover Pisa hanging over it, and with the
certainty of having to pay large subsidies to the French king, the State
was likely to prefer money to manuscripts.

To Romola these grave political changes had gathered their chief
interest from their bearing on the fulfilment of her father's wish.  She
had been brought up in learned seclusion from the interests of actual
life, and had been accustomed to think of heroic deeds and great
principles as something antithetic to the vulgar present, of the Pnyx
and the Forum as something more worthy of attention than the councils of
living Florentine men.  And now the expulsion of the Medici meant little
more for her than the extinction of her best hope about her father's
library.  The times, she knew, were unpleasant for friends of the
Medici, like her godfather and Tito: superstitious shopkeepers and the
stupid rabble were full of suspicions; but her new keen interest in
public events, in the outbreak of war, in the issue of the French king's
visit, in the changes that were likely to happen in the State, was
kindled solely by the sense of love and duty to her father's memory.
All Romola's ardour had been concentrated in her affections.  Her share
in her father's learned pursuits had been for her little more than a
toil which was borne for his sake; and Tito's airy brilliant faculty had
no attraction for her that was not merged in the deeper sympathies that
belong to young love and trust.  Romola had had contact with no mind
that could stir the larger possibilities of her nature; they lay folded
and crushed like embryonic wings, making no element in her consciousness
beyond an occasional vague uneasiness.

But this new personal interest of hers in public affairs had made her
care at last to understand precisely what influence Fra Girolamo's
preaching was likely to have on the turn of events.  Changes in the form
of the State were talked of, and all she could learn from Tito, whose
secretaryship and serviceable talents carried him into the heart of
public business, made her only the more eager to fill out her lonely day
by going to hear for herself what it was that was just now leading all
Florence by the ears.  This morning, for the first time, she had been to
hear one of the Advent sermons in the Duomo.  When Tito had left her,
she had formed a sudden resolution, and after visiting the spot where
her father was buried in Santa Croce, had walked on to the Duomo.  The
memory of that last scene with Dino was still vivid within her whenever
she recalled it, but it had receded behind the experience and anxieties
of her married life.  The new sensibilities and questions which it had
half awakened in her were quieted again by that subjection to her
husband's mind which is felt by every wife who loves her husband with
passionate devotedness and full reliance.  She remembered the effect of
Fra Girolamo's voice and presence on her as a ground for expecting that
his sermon might move her in spite of his being a narrow-minded monk.
But the sermon did no more than slightly deepen her previous impression,
that this fanatical preacher of tribulations was after all a man towards
whom it might be possible for her to feel personal regard and reverence.
The denunciations and exhortations simply arrested her attention.  She
felt no terror, no pangs of conscience: it was the roll of distant
thunder, that seemed grand, but could not shake her.  But when she heard
Savonarola invoke martyrdom, she sobbed with the rest: she felt herself
penetrated with a new sensation--a strange sympathy with something apart
from all the definable interests of her life.  It was not altogether
unlike the thrill which had accompanied certain rare heroic touches in
history and poetry; but the resemblance was as that between the memory
of music, and the sense of being possessed by actual vibrating
harmonies.

But that transient emotion, strong as it was, seemed to lie quite
outside the inner chamber and sanctuary of her life.  She was not
thinking of Fra Girolamo now; she was listening anxiously for the step
of her husband.  During these three months of their double solitude she
had thought of each day as an epoch in which their union might begin to
be more perfect.  She was conscious of being sometimes a little too sad
or too urgent about what concerned her father's memory--a little too
critical or coldly silent when Tito narrated the things that were said
and done in the world he frequented--a little too hasty in suggesting
that by living quite simply as her father had done, they might become
rich enough to pay Bernardo del Nero, and reduce the difficulties about
the library.  It was not possible that Tito could feel so strongly on
this last point as she did, and it was asking a great deal from him to
give up luxuries for which he really laboured.  The next time Tito came
home she would be careful to suppress all those promptings that seemed
to isolate her from him.  Romola was labouring, as a loving woman must,
to subdue her nature to her husband's.  The great need of her heart
compelled her to strangle, with desperate resolution, every rising
impulse of suspicion, pride, and resentment; she felt equal to any
self-infliction that would save her from ceasing to love.  That would
have been like the hideous nightmare in which the world had seemed to
break away all round her, and leave her feet overhanging the darkness.
Romola had never distinctly imagined such a future for herself; she was
only beginning to feel the presence of effort in that clinging trust
which had once been mere repose.

She waited and listened long, for Tito had not come straight home after
leaving Niccolo Caparra, and it was more than two hours after the time
when he was crossing the Ponte Rubaconte that Romola heard the great
door of the court turning on its hinges, and hastened to the head of the
stone steps.  There was a lamp hanging over the stairs, and they could
see each other distinctly as he ascended.  The eighteen months had
produced a more definable change in Romola's face than in Tito's; the
expression was more subdued, less cold, and more beseeching, and, as the
pink flush overspread her face now, in her joy that the long waiting was
at an end, she was much lovelier than on the day when Tito had first
seen her.  On that day, any on-looker would have said that Romola's
nature was made to command, and Tito's to bend; yet now Romola's mouth
was quivering a little, and there was some timidity in her glance.

He made an effort to smile, as she said--

"My Tito, you are tired; it has been a fatiguing day: is it not true?"

Maso was there, and no more was said until they had crossed the
ante-chamber and closed the door of the library behind them.  The wood
was burning brightly on the great dogs; that was one welcome for Tito,
late as he was, and Romola's gentle voice was another.

He just turned and kissed her when she took off his mantle; then he went
towards a high-backed chair placed for him near the fire, threw himself
into it, and flung away his cap, saying, not peevishly, but in a
fatigued tone of remonstrance, as he gave a slight shudder--

"Romola, I wish you would give up sitting in this library.  Surely our
own rooms are pleasanter in this chill weather."

Romola felt hurt.  She had never seen Tito so indifferent in his manner;
he was usually full of lively solicitous attention.  And she had thought
so much of his return to her after the long day's absence!  He must be
very weary.

"I wonder you have forgotten, Tito," she answered, looking at him
anxiously, as if she wanted to read an excuse for him in the signs of
bodily fatigue.  "You know I am making the catalogue on the new plan
that my father wished for; you have not time to help me, so I must work
at it closely."

Tito, instead of meeting Romola's glance, closed his eyes and rubbed his
hands over his face and hair.  He felt he was behaving unlike himself,
but he would make amends to-morrow.  The terrible resurrection of secret
fears, which, if Romola had known them, would have alienated her from
him for ever, caused him to feel an alienation already begun between
them--caused him to feel a certain repulsion towards a woman from whose
mind he was in danger.  The feeling had taken hold of him unawares, and
he was vexed with himself for behaving in this new cold way to her.  He
could not suddenly command any affectionate looks or words; he could
only exert himself to say what might serve as an excuse.

"I am not well, Romola; you must not be surprised if I am peevish."

"Ah, you have had so much to tire you to-day," said Romola, kneeling
down close to him, and laying her arm on his chest while she put his
hair back caressingly.

Suddenly she drew her arm away with a start, and a gaze of alarmed
inquiry.

"What have you got under your tunic, Tito?  Something as hard as iron."

"It _is_ iron--it is chain-armour," he said at once.  He was prepared
for the surprise and the question, and he spoke quietly, as of something
that he was not hurried to explain.

"There was some unexpected danger to-day, then?" said Romola, in a tone
of conjecture.  "You had it lent to you for the procession?"

"No; it is my own.  I shall be obliged to wear it constantly, for some
time."

"What is it that threatens you, my Tito?" said Romola, looking
terrified, and clinging to him again.

"Every one is threatened in these times, who is not a rabid enemy of the
Medici.  Don't look distressed, my Romola--this armour will make me safe
against covert attacks."

Tito put his hand on her neck and smiled.  This little dialogue about
the armour had broken through the new crust, and made a channel for the
sweet habit of kindness.

"But my godfather, then," said Romola; "is not he, too, in danger?  And
he takes no precautions--ought he not? since he must surely be in more
danger than you, who have so little influence compared with him."

"It is just because I am less important that I am in more danger," said
Tito, readily.  "I am suspected constantly of being an envoy.  And men
like Messer Bernardo are protected by their position and their extensive
family connections, which spread among all parties, while I am a Greek
that nobody would avenge."

"But, Tito, is it a fear of some particular person, or only a vague
sense of danger, that has made you think of wearing this?"  Romola was
unable to repel the idea of a degrading fear in Tito, which mingled
itself with her anxiety.

"I have had special threats," said Tito, "but I must beg you to be
silent on the subject, my Romola.  I shall consider that you have broken
my confidence, if you mention it to your godfather."

"Assuredly I will not mention it," said Romola, blushing, "if you wish
it to be a secret.  But, dearest Tito," she added, after a moment's
pause, in a tone of loving anxiety, "it will make you very wretched."

"What will make me wretched?" he said, with a scarcely perceptible
movement across his face, as from some darting sensation.

"This fear--this heavy armour.  I can't help shuddering as I feel it
under my arm.  I could fancy it a story of enchantment--that some
malignant fiend had changed your sensitive human skin into a hard shell.
It seems so unlike my bright, light-hearted Tito!"

"Then you would rather have your husband exposed to danger, when he
leaves you?" said Tito, smiling.  "If you don't mind my being poniarded
or shot, why need I mind?  I will give up the armour--shall I?"

"No, Tito, no.  I am fanciful.  Do not heed what I have said.  But such
crimes are surely not common in Florence?  I have always heard my father
and godfather say so.  Have they become frequent lately?"

"It is not unlikely they will become frequent, with the bitter hatreds
that are being bred continually."

Romola was silent a few moments.  She shrank from insisting further on
the subject of the armour.  She tried to shake it off.

"Tell me what has happened to-day," she said, in a cheerful tone.  "Has
all gone off well?"

"Excellently well.  First of all, the rain came and put an end to Luca
Corsini's oration, which nobody wanted to hear, and a ready-tongued
personage--some say it was Gaddi, some say it was Melema, but really it
was done so quickly no one knows who it was--had the honour of giving
the Cristianissimo the briefest possible welcome in bad French."

"Tito, it was you, I know," said Romola, smiling brightly, and kissing
him.  "How is it you never care about claiming anything?  And after
that?"

"Oh! after that, there was a shower of armour and jewels, and trappings,
such as you saw at the last Florentine _giostra_, only a great deal more
of them.  There was strutting, and prancing, and confusion, and
scrambling, and the people shouted, and the Cristianissimo smiled from
ear to ear.  And after that there was a great deal of flattery, and
eating, and play.  I was at Tornabuoni's.  I will tell you about it
to-morrow."

"Yes, dearest, never mind now.  But is there any more hope that things
will end peaceably for Florence, that the Republic will not get into
fresh troubles?"

Tito gave a shrug.  "Florence will have no peace but what it pays well
for; that is clear."

Romola's face saddened, but she checked herself, and said, cheerfully,
"You would not guess where I went to-day, Tito.  I went to the Duomo, to
hear Fra Girolamo."

Tito looked startled; he had immediately thought of Baldassarre's
entrance into the Duomo; but Romola gave his look another meaning.

"You are surprised, are you not?  It was a sudden thought.  I want to
know all about the public affairs now, and I determined to hear for
myself what the Frate promised the people about this French invasion."

"Well, and what did you think of the prophet?"

"He certainly has a very mysterious power, that man.  A great deal of
his sermon was what I expected; but once I was strangely moved--I sobbed
with the rest."

"Take care, Romola," said Tito, playfully, feeling relieved that she had
said nothing about Baldassarre; "you have a touch of fanaticism in you.
I shall have you seeing visions, like your brother."

"No; it was the same with every one else.  He carried them all with him;
unless it were that gross Dolfo Spini, whom I saw there making grimaces.
There was even a wretched-looking man, with a rope round his neck--an
escaped prisoner, I should think, who had run in for shelter--a very
wild-eyed old man: I saw him with great tears rolling down his cheeks,
as he looked and listened quite eagerly."

There was a slight pause before Tito spoke.

"I saw the man," he said,--"the prisoner.  I was outside the Duomo with
Lorenzo Tornabuoni when he ran in.  He had escaped from a French
soldier.  Did you see him when you came out?"

"No, he went out with our good old Piero di Cosimo.  I saw Piero come in
and cut off his rope, and take him out of the church.  But you want
rest, Tito?  You feel ill?"

"Yes," said Tito, rising.  The horrible sense that he must live in
continual dread of what Baldassarre had said or done pressed upon him
like a cold weight.



CHAPTER TWENTY EIGHT.

THE PAINTED RECORD.

Four days later, Romola was on her way to the house of Piero di Cosimo,
in the Via Gualfonda.  Some of the streets through which she had to pass
were lined with Frenchmen who were gazing at Florence, and with
Florentines who were gazing at the French, and the gaze was not on
either side entirely friendly and admiring.  The first nation in Europe,
of necessity finding itself, when out of its own country, in the
presence of general inferiority, naturally assumed an air of conscious
pre-eminence; and the Florentines, who had taken such pains to play the
host amiably, were getting into the worst humour with their too superior
guests.

For after the first smiling compliments and festivities were over--after
wondrous Mysteries with unrivalled machinery of floating clouds and
angels had been presented in churches--after the royal guest had
honoured Florentine dames with much of his Most Christian ogling at
balls and suppers, and business had begun to be talked of--it appeared
that the new Charlemagne regarded Florence as a conquered city, inasmuch
as he had entered it with his lance in rest, talked of leaving his
viceroy behind him, and had thoughts of bringing back the Medici.
Singular logic this appeared to be on the part of an elect instrument of
God! since the policy of Piero de' Medici, disowned by the people, had
been the only offence of Florence against the majesty of France.  And
Florence was determined not to submit.  The determination was being
expressed very strongly in consultations of citizens inside the Old
Palace, and it was beginning to show itself on the broad flags of the
streets and piazza wherever there was an opportunity of flouting an
insolent Frenchman.  Under these circumstances the streets were not
altogether a pleasant promenade for well-born women; but Romola,
shrouded in her black veil and mantle, and with old Maso by her side,
felt secure enough from impertinent observation.

And she was impatient to visit Piero di Cosimo.  A copy of her father's
portrait as Oedipus, which he had long ago undertaken to make for her,
was not yet finished; and Piero was so uncertain in his work--sometimes,
when the demand was not peremptory, laying aside a picture for months;
sometimes thrusting it into a corner or coffer, where it was likely to
be utterly forgotten--that she felt it necessary to watch over his
progress.  She was a favourite with the painter, and he was inclined to
fulfil any wish of hers, but no general inclination could be trusted as
a safeguard against his sudden whims.  He had told her the week before
that the picture would perhaps be finished by this time; and Romola was
nervously anxious to have in her possession a copy of the only portrait
existing of her father in the days of his blindness, lest his image
should grow dim in her mind.  The sense of defect in her devotedness to
him made her cling with all the force of compunction as well as
affection to the duties of memory.  Love does not aim simply at the
conscious good of the beloved object: it is not satisfied without
perfect loyalty of heart; it aims at its own completeness.

Romola, by special favour, was allowed to intrude upon the painter
without previous notice.  She lifted the iron slide and called Piero in
a flute-like tone, as the little maiden with the eggs had done in Tito's
presence.  Piero was quick in answering, but when he opened the door he
accounted for his quickness in a manner that was not complimentary.

"Ah, Madonna Romola, is it you?  I thought my eggs were come; I wanted
them."

"I have brought you something better than hard eggs, Piero.  Maso has
got a little basket full of cakes and _confetti_ for you," said Romola,
smiling, as she put back her veil.  She took the basket from Maso, and
stepping into the house, said--

"I know you like these things when you can have them without trouble.
Confess you do."

"Yes, when they come to me as easily as the light does," said Piero,
folding his arms and looking down at the sweetmeats as Romola uncovered
them and glanced at him archly.  "And they are come along with the light
now," he added, lifting his eyes to her face and hair with a painter's
admiration, as her hood, dragged by the weight of her veil, fell
backward.

"But I know what the sweetmeats are for," he went on; "they are to stop
my mouth while you scold me.  Well, go on into the next room, and you
will see I've done something to the picture since you saw it, though
it's not finished yet.  But I didn't promise, you know: I take care not
to promise:--

  "`Chi promette e non mantiene
  L'anima sua non va mai bene.'"

The door opening on the wild garden was closed now, and the painter was
at work.  Not at Romola's picture, however.  That was standing on the
floor, propped against the wall, and Piero stooped to lift it, that he
might carry it into the proper light.  But in lifting away this picture,
he had disclosed another--the oil-sketch of Tito, to which he had made
an important addition within the last few days.  It was so much smaller
than the other picture, that it stood far within it, and Piero, apt to
forget where he had placed anything, was not aware of what he had
revealed as, peering at some detail in the painting which he held in his
hands, he went to place it on an easel.  But Romola exclaimed, flushing
with astonishment--

"That is Tito!"

Piero looked round, and gave a silent shrug.  He was vexed at his own
forgetfulness.

She was still looking at the sketch in astonishment; but presently she
turned towards the painter, and said with puzzled alarm--

"What a strange picture!  When did you paint it?  What does it mean?"

"A mere fancy of mine," said Piero, lifting off his skull-cap,
scratching his head, and making the usual grimace by which he avoided
the betrayal of any feeling.  "I wanted a handsome young face for it,
and your husband's was just the thing."

He went forward, stooped down to the picture, and lifting it away with
its back to Romola, pretended to be giving it a passing examination,
before putting it aside as a thing not good enough to show.

But Romola, who had the fact of the armour in her mind, and was
penetrated by this strange coincidence of things which associated Tito
with the idea of fear, went to his elbow and said--

"Don't put it away; let me look again.  That man with the rope round his
neck--I saw him--I saw you come to him in the Duomo.  What was it that
made you put him into a picture with Tito?"

Piero saw no better resource than to tell part of the truth.

"It was a mere accident.  The man was running away--running up the
steps, and caught hold of your husband: I suppose he had stumbled.  I
happened to be there, and saw it, and I thought the savage-looking old
fellow was a good subject.  But it's worth nothing--it's only a freakish
daub, of mine."  Piero ended contemptuously, moving the sketch away with
an air of decision, and putting it on a high shelf.  "Come and look at
the Oedipus."

He had shown a little too much anxiety in putting the sketch out of her
sight, and had produced the very impression he had sought to prevent--
that there was really something unpleasant, something disadvantageous to
Tito, in the circumstances out of which the picture arose.  But this
impression silenced her: her pride and delicacy shrank from questioning
further, where questions might seem to imply that she could entertain
even a slight suspicion against her husband.  She merely said, in as
quiet a tone as she could--

"He was a strange piteous-looking man, that prisoner.  Do you know
anything more of him?"

"No more: I showed him the way to the hospital, that's all.  See, now,
the face of Oedipus is pretty nearly finished; tell me what you think of
it."

Romola now gave her whole attention to her father's portrait, standing
in long silence before it.

"Ah," she said at last, "you have done what I wanted.  You have given it
more of the listening look.  My good Piero,"--she turned towards him
with bright moist eyes--"I am very grateful to you."

"Now that's what I can't bear in you women," said Piero, turning
impatiently, and kicking aside the objects that littered the floor--"you
are always pouring out feelings where there's no call for them.  Why
should you be grateful to me for a picture you pay me for, especially
when I make you wait for it?  And if I paint a picture, I suppose it's
for my own pleasure and credit to paint it well, eh?  Are you to thank a
man for not being a rogue or a noodle?  It's enough if he himself thanks
Messer Domeneddio, who has made him neither the one nor the other.  But
women think walls are held together with honey."

"You crusty Piero!  I forgot how snappish you are.  Here, put this nice
sweetmeat in your mouth," said Romola, smiling through her tears, and
taking something very crisp and sweet from the little basket.

Piero accepted it very much as that proverbial bear that dreams of pears
might accept an exceedingly mellow "swan-egg"--really liking the gift,
but accustomed to have his pleasures and pains concealed under a shaggy
coat.

"It's good, Madonna Antigone," said Piero, putting his fingers in the
basket for another.  He had eaten nothing but hard eggs for a fortnight.
Romola stood opposite him, feeling her new anxiety suspended for a
little while by the sight of this _naive_ enjoyment.

"Good--bye, Piero," she said, presently, setting down the basket.  "I
promise not to thank you if you finish the portrait soon and well I will
tell you, you were bound to do it for your own credit."

"Good," said Piero, curtly, helping her with much deftness to fold her
mantle and veil round her.

"I'm glad she asked no more questions about that sketch," he thought,
when he had closed the door behind her.  "I should be sorry for her to
guess that I thought her fine husband a good model for a coward.  But I
made light of it; she'll not think of it again."

Piero was too sanguine, as open-hearted men are apt to be when they
attempt a little clever simulation.  The thought of the picture pressed
more and more on Romola as she walked homeward.  She could not help
putting together the two facts of the chain-armour and the encounter
mentioned by Piero between her husband and the prisoner, which had
happened on the morning of the day when the armour was adopted.  That
look of terror which the painter had given Tito, had he seen it?  What
could it all mean?

"It means nothing," she tried to assure herself.  "It was a mere
coincidence.  Shall I ask Tito about it?"  Her mind said at last, "No: I
will not question him about anything he did not tell me spontaneously.
It is an offence against the trust I owe him."  Her heart said, "I dare
not ask him."

There was a terrible flaw in the trust: she was afraid of any hasty
movement, as men are who hold something precious and want to believe
that it is not broken.



CHAPTER TWENTY NINE.

A MOMENT OF TRIUMPH.

"The old fellow has vanished; went on towards Arezzo the next morning;
not liking the smell of the French, I suppose, after being their
prisoner.  I went to the hospital to inquire after him; I wanted to know
if those broth-making monks had found out whether he was in his right
mind or not.  However, they said he showed no signs of madness--only
took no notice of questions, and seemed to be planting a vine twenty
miles off.  He was a mysterious old tiger.  I should have liked to know
something more about him."

It was in Nello's shop that Piero di Cosimo was speaking, on the
twenty-fourth of November, just a week after the entrance of the French.
There was a party of six or seven assembled at the rather unusual hour
of three in the afternoon; for it was a day on which all Florence was
excited by the prospect of some decisive political event.  Every
lounging-place was full, and every shopkeeper who had no wife or deputy
to leave in charge, stood at his door with his thumbs in his belt; while
the streets were constantly sprinkled with artisans pausing or passing
lazily like floating splinters, ready to rush forward impetuously if any
object attracted them.

Nello had been thrumming the lute as he half sat on the board against
the shop-window, and kept an outlook towards the piazza.

"Ah," he said, laying down the lute, with emphasis, "I would not for a
gold florin have missed that sight of the French soldiers waddling in
their broad shoes after their runaway prisoners!  That comes of leaving
my shop to shave magnificent chins.  It is always so: if ever I quit
this navel of the earth something takes the opportunity of happening in
my piazza."

"Yes, you ought to have been there," said Piero, in his biting way,
"just to see your favourite Greek look as frightened as if Satanasso had
laid hold of him.  I like to see your ready-smiling Messeri caught in a
sudden wind and obliged to show their lining in spite of themselves.
What colour do you think a man's liver is, who looks like a bleached
deer as soon as a chance stranger lays hold of him suddenly?"

"Piero, keep that vinegar of thine as sauce to thine own eggs!  What is
it against my _bel erudito_ that he looked startled when he felt a pair
of claws upon him and saw an unchained madman at his elbow?  Your
scholar is not like those beastly Swiss and Germans, whose heads are
only fit for battering-rams, and who have such large appetites that they
think nothing of taking a cannon-ball before breakfast.  We Florentines
count some other qualities in a man besides that vulgar stuff called
bravery, which is to be got by hiring dunderheads at so much per dozen.
I tell you, as soon as men found out that they had more brains than
oxen, they set the oxen to draw for them; and when we Florentines found
out that we had more brains than other men we set them to fight for us."

"Treason, Nello!" a voice called out from the inner sanctum; "that is
not the doctrine of the State.  Florence is grinding its weapons; and
the last well-authenticated vision announced by the Frate was Mars
standing on the Palazzo Vecchio with his arm on the shoulder of San
Giovanni Battista, who was offering him a piece of honeycomb."

"It is well, Francesco," said Nello.  "Florence has a few thicker skulls
that may do to bombard Pisa with; there will still be the finer spirits
left at home to do the thinking and the shaving.  And as for our Piero
here, if he makes such a point of valour, let him carry his biggest
brush for a weapon and his palette for a shield, and challenge the
widest-mouthed Swiss he can see in the Prato to a single combat."

"_Va_, Nello," growled Piero, "thy tongue runs on as usual, like a mill
when the Arno's full--whether there's grist or not."

"Excellent grist, I tell thee.  For it would be as reasonable to expect
a grizzled painter like thee to be fond of getting a javelin inside thee
as to expect a man whose wits have been sharpened on the classics to
like having his handsome face clawed by a wild beast."

"There you go, supposing you'll get people to put their legs into a sack
because you call it a pair of hosen," said Piero.  "Who said anything
about a wild beast, or about an unarmed man rushing on battle?  Fighting
is a trade, and it's not my trade.  I should be a fool to run after
danger, but I could face it if it came to me."

"How is it you're so afraid of the thunder, then, my Piero?" said Nello,
determined to chase down the accuser.  "You ought to be able to
understand why one man is shaken by a thing that seems a trifle to
others--you who hide yourself with the rats as soon as a storm comes
on."

"That is because I have a particular sensibility to loud sounds; it has
nothing to do with my courage or my conscience."

"Well, and Tito Melema may have a peculiar sensibility to being laid
hold of unexpectedly by prisoners who have run away from French
soldiers.  Men are born with antipathies; I myself can't abide the smell
of mint.  Tito was born with an antipathy to old prisoners who stumble
and clutch.  Ecco!"

There was a general laugh at Nello's defence, and it was clear that
Piero's disinclination towards Tito was not shared by the company.  The
painter, with his undecipherable grimace, took the tow from his
scarsella and stuffed his ears in indignant contempt, while Nello went
on triumphantly--

"No, my Piero, I can't afford to have my _bel erudito_ decried; and
Florence can't afford it either, with her scholars moulting off her at
the early age of forty.  Our Phoenix Pico just gone straight to
Paradise, as the Frate has informed us; and the incomparable Poliziano,
not two months since, gone to--well, well, let us hope he is not gone to
the eminent scholars in the Malebolge."

"By the way," said Francesco Cei, "have you heard that Camilla Rucellai
has outdone the Frate in her prophecies?  She prophesied two years ago
that Pico would die in the time of lilies.  He has died in November.
`Not at all the time of lilies,' said the scorners.  `Go to!' says
Camilla; `it is the lilies of France I meant, and it seems to me they
are close enough under your nostrils.'  I say, `Euge, Camilla!'  If the
Frate can prove that any one of his visions has been as well fulfilled,
I'll declare myself a Piagnone to-morrow."

"You are something too flippant about the Frate, Francesco," said Pietro
Cennini, the scholarly.  "We are all indebted to him in these weeks for
preaching peace and quietness, and the laying aside of party quarrels.
They are men of small discernment who would be glad to see the people
slipping the Frate's leash just now.  And if the Most Christian King is
obstinate about the treaty to-day, and will not sign what is fair and
honourable to Florence, Fra Girolamo is the man we must trust in to
bring him to reason."

"You speak truth, Messer Pietro," said Nello; "the Frate is one of the
firmest nails Florence has to hang on--at least, that is the opinion of
the most respectable chins I have the honour of shaving.  But young
Messer Niccolo was saying here the other morning--and doubtless
Francesco means the same thing--there is as wonderful a power of
stretching in the meaning of visions as in Dido's bull's hide.  It seems
to me a dream may mean whatever comes after it.  As our Franco Sacchetti
says, a woman dreams over-night of a serpent biting her, breaks a
drinking-cup the next day, and cries out, `Look you, I thought something
would happen--it's plain now what the serpent meant.'"

"But the Frate's visions are not of that sort," said Cronaca.  "He not
only says what will happen--that the Church will be scourged and
renovated, and the heathens converted--he says it shall happen quickly.
He is no slippery pretender who provides loopholes for himself, he is--"

"What is this? what is this?" exclaimed Nello, jumping off the board,
and putting his head out at the door.  "Here are people streaming into
the piazza, and shouting.  Something must have happened in the Via
Larga.  Aha!" he burst forth with delighted astonishment, stepping out
laughing and waving his cap.

All the rest of the company hastened to the door.  News from the Via
Larga was just what they had been waiting for.  But if the news had come
into the piazza, they were not a little surprised at the form of its
advent.  Carried above the shoulders of the people, on a bench
apparently snatched up in the street, sat Tito Melema, in smiling
amusement at the compulsion he was under.  His cap had slipped off his
head, and hung by the becchetto which was wound loosely round his neck;
and as he saw the group at Nello's door he lifted up his fingers in
beckoning recognition.  The next minute he had leaped from the bench on
to a cart filled with bales, that stood in the broad space between the
Baptistery and the steps of the Duomo, while the people swarmed round
him with the noisy eagerness of poultry expecting to be fed.  But there
was silence when he began to speak in his clear mellow voice--

"Citizens of Florence!  I have no warrant to tell the news except your
will.  But the news is good, and will harm no man in the telling.  The
Most Christian King is signing a treaty that is honourable to Florence.
But you owe it to one of your citizens, who spoke a word worthy of the
ancient Romans--you owe it to Piero Capponi!"

Immediately there was a roar of voices.  "Capponi!  Capponi!  What said
our Piero?"  "Ah! he wouldn't stand being sent from Herod to Pilate!"
"We knew Piero!" "_Orsu_!  Tell us, what did he say?"

When the roar of insistance had subsided a little, Tito began again--

"The Most Christian King demanded a little too much--was obstinate--said
at last, `I shall order my trumpets to sound.'  Then, Florentine
citizens! your Piero Capponi, speaking with the voice of a free city,
said, `If you sound your trumpets, we will ring our bells!'  He snatched
the copy of the dishonouring conditions from the hands of the secretary,
tore it in pieces, and turned to leave the royal presence."

Again there were loud shouts--and again impatient demands for more.

"Then, Florentines, the high majesty of France felt, perhaps for the
first time, all the majesty of a free city.  And the Most Christian King
himself hastened from his place to call Piero Capponi back.  The great
spirit of your Florentine city did its work by a great word, without
need of the great actions that lay ready behind it.  And the King has
consented to sign the treaty, which preserves the honour, as well as the
safety, of Florence.  The banner of France will float over every
Florentine galley in sign of amity and common privilege, but above that
banner will be written the word `Liberty!'

"That is all the news I have to tell; is it not enough?--since it is for
the glory of every one of you, citizens of Florence, that you have a
fellow-citizen who knows how to speak your will."

As the shouts rose again, Tito looked round with inward amusement at the
various crowd, each of whom was elated with the notion that Piero
Capponi had somehow represented him--that he was the mind of which
Capponi was the mouthpiece.  He enjoyed the humour of the incident,
which had suddenly transformed him, an alien, and a friend of the
Medici, into an orator who tickled the ears of the people blatant for
some unknown good which they called liberty.  He felt quite glad that he
had been laid hold of and hurried along by the crowd as he was coming
out of the palace in the Via Larga with a commission to the Signoria.
It was very easy, very pleasant, this exercise of speaking to the
general satisfaction: a man who knew how to persuade need never be in
danger from any party; he could convince each that he was feigning with
all the others.  The gestures and faces of weavers and dyers were
certainly amusing when looked at from above in this way.

Tito was beginning to get easier in his armour, and at this moment was
quite unconscious of it.  He stood with one hand holding his recovered
cap, and with the other at his belt, the light of a complacent smile in
his long lustrous eyes, as he made a parting reverence to his audience,
before springing down from the bales--when suddenly his glance met that
of a man who had not at all the amusing aspect of the exulting weavers,
dyers, and woolcarders.  The face of this man was clean-shaven, his hair
close-clipped, and he wore a decent felt hat.  A single glance would
hardly have sufficed to assure any one but Tito that this was the face
of the escaped prisoner who had laid hold of him on the steps.  But to
Tito it came not simply as the face of the escaped prisoner, but as a
face with which he had been familiar long years before.

It seemed all compressed into a second--the sight of Baldassarre looking
at him, the sensation shooting through him like a fiery arrow, and the
act of leaping from the cart.  He would have leaped down in the same
instant, whether he had seen Baldassarre or not, for he was in a hurry
to be gone to the Palazzo Vecchio: this time he had not betrayed himself
by look or movement, and he said inwardly that he should not be taken by
surprise again; he should be prepared to see this face rise up
continually like the intermittent blotch that comes in diseased vision.
But this reappearance of Baldassarre so much more in his own likeness
tightened the pressure of dread the idea of his madness lost its
likelihood now he was shaven and clad like a decent though poor citizen.
Certainly, there was a great change in his face; but how could it be
otherwise?  And yet, if he were perfectly sane--in possession of all his
powers and all his learning, why was he lingering in this way before
making known his identity?  It must be for the sake of making his scheme
of vengeance more complete.  But he did linger: that at least gave an
opportunity for flight.  And Tito began to think that flight was his
only resource.

But while he, with his back turned on the Piazza del Duomo, had lost the
recollection of the new part he had been playing, and was no longer
thinking of the many things which a ready brain and tongue made easy,
but of a few things which destiny had somehow made very difficult, the
enthusiasm which he had fed contemptuously was creating a scene in that
piazza in grand contrast with the inward drama of self-centred fear
which he had carried away from it.

The crowd, on Tito's disappearance, had begun to turn their faces
towards the outlets of the piazza in the direction of the Via Larga,
when the sight of _mazzieri_, or mace-bearers, entering from the Via de'
Martelli, announced the approach of dignitaries.  They must be the
syndics, or commissioners charged with the effecting of the treaty; the
treaty must be already signed, and they had come away from the royal
presence.  Piero Capponi was coming--the brave heart that had known how
to speak for Florence.  The effect on the crowd was remarkable; they
parted with softening, dropping voices, subsiding into silence,--and the
silence became so perfect that the tread of the syndics on the broad
pavement, and the rustle of their black silk garments, could be heard,
like rain in the night.  There were four of them; but it was not the two
learned doctors of law, Messer Guidantonio Vespucci and Messer Domenico
Bonsi, that the crowd waited for; it was not Francesco Valori, popular
as he had become in these late days.  The moment belonged to another
man, of firm presence, as little inclined to humour the people as to
humour any other unreasonable claimants--loving order, like one who by
force of fortune had been made a merchant, and by force of nature had
become a soldier.  It was not till he was seen at the entrance of the
piazza that the silence was broken, and then one loud shout of "Capponi,
Capponi!  Well done, Capponi!" rang through the piazza.

The simple, resolute man looked round him with grave joy.  His
fellow-citizens gave him a great funeral two years later, when he had
died in fight; there were torches carried by all the magistracy, and
torches again, and trains of banners.  But it is not known that he felt
any joy in the oration that was delivered in his praise, as the banners
waved over his bier.  Let us be glad that he got some thanks and praise
while he lived.



CHAPTER THIRTY.

THE AVENGER'S SECRET.

It was the first time that Baldassarre had been in the Piazza del Duomo
since his escape.  He had a strong desire to hear the remarkable monk
preach again, but he had shrunk from reappearing in the same spot where
he had been seen half naked, with neglected hair, with a rope round his
neck--in the same spot where he had been called a madman.  The feeling,
in its freshness, was too strong to be overcome by any trust he had in
the change he had made in his appearance; for when the words "_some
madman, surely_," had fallen from Tito's lips, it was not their baseness
and cruelty only that had made their viper sting--it was Baldassarre's
instantaneous bitter consciousness that he might be unable to prove the
words false.  Along with the passionate desire for vengeance which
possessed him had arisen the keen sense that his power of achieving the
vengeance was doubtful.  It was as if Tito had been helped by some
diabolical prompter, who had whispered Baldassarre's saddest secret in
the traitor's ear.  He was not mad; for he carried within him that
piteous stamp of sanity, the clear consciousness of shattered faculties;
he measured his own feebleness.  With the first movement of vindictive
rage awoke a vague caution, like that of a wild beast that is fierce but
feeble--or like that of an insect whose little fragment of earth has
given way, and made it pause in a palsy of distrust.  It was this
distrust, this determination to take no step which might betray anything
concerning himself, that had made Baldassarre reject Piero di Cosimo's
friendly advances.

He had been equally cautious at the hospital, only telling, in answer to
the questions of the brethren there, that he had been made a prisoner by
the French on his way from Genoa.  But his age, and the indications in
his speech and manner that he was of a different class from the ordinary
mendicants and poor travellers who were entertained in the hospital, had
induced the monks to offer him extra charity: a coarse woollen tunic to
protect him from the cold, a pair of peasant's shoes, and a few
_danari_, smallest of Florentine coins, to help him on his way.  He had
gone on the road to Arezzo early in the morning; but he had paused at
the first little town, and had used a couple of his _danari_ to get
himself shaved, and to have his circle of hair clipped short, in his
former fashion.  The barber there had a little hand-mirror of bright
steel: it was a long while, it was years, since Baldassarre had looked
at himself, and now, as his eyes fell on that hand-mirror, a new thought
shot through his mind.  "Was he so changed that Tito really did not know
him?"  The thought was such a sudden arrest of impetuous currents, that
it was a painful shock to him; his hand shook like a leaf, as he put
away the barber's arm and asked for the mirror.  He wished to see
himself before he was shaved.  The barber, noticing his tremulousness,
held the mirror for him.

No, he was not so changed as that.  He himself had known the wrinkles as
they had been three years ago; they were only deeper now: there was the
same rough, clumsy skin, making little superficial bosses on the brow,
like so many cipher-marks; the skin was only yellower, only looked more
like a lifeless rind.  That shaggy white beard--it was no disguise to
eyes that had looked closely at him for sixteen years--to eyes that
ought to have searched for him with the expectation of finding him
changed, as men search for the beloved among the bodies cast up by the
waters.  There was something different in his glance, but it was a
difference that should only have made the recognition of him the more
startling; for is not a known voice all the more thrilling when it is
heard as a cry?  But the doubt was folly: he had felt that Tito knew
him.  He put out his hand and pushed the mirror away.  The strong
currents were rushing on again, and the energies of hatred and vengeance
were active once more.

He went back on the way towards Florence again, but he did not wish to
enter the city till dusk; so he turned aside from the highroad, and sat
down by a little pool shadowed on one side by alder-bushes still
sprinkled with yellow leaves.  It was a calm November day, and he no
sooner saw the pool than he thought its still surface might be a mirror
for him.  He wanted to contemplate himself slowly, as he had not dared
to do in the presence of the barber.  He sat down on the edge of the
pool, and bent forward to look earnestly at the image of himself.

Was there something wandering and imbecile in his face--something like
what he felt in his mind?

Not now; not when he was examining himself with a look of eager inquiry:
on the contrary, there was an intense purpose in his eyes.  But at other
times?  Yes, it must be so: in the long hours when he had the vague
aching of an unremembered past within him--when he seemed to sit in dark
loneliness, visited by whispers which died out mockingly as he strained
his ear after them, and by forms that seemed to approach him and float
away as he thrust out his hand to grasp them--in those hours, doubtless,
there must be continual frustration and amazement in his glance.  And
more horrible still, when the thick cloud parted for a moment, and, as
he sprang forward with hope, rolled together again, and left him
helpless as before; doubtless, there was then a blank confusion in his
face, as of a man suddenly smitten with blindness.

Could he prove anything?  Could he even begin to allege anything, with
the confidence that the links of thought would not break away?  Would
any believe that he had ever had a mind filled with rare knowledge, busy
with close thoughts, ready with various speech?  It had all slipped away
from him--that laboriously-gathered store.  Was it utterly and for ever
gone from him, like the waters from an urn lost in the wide ocean?  Or,
was it still within him, imprisoned by some obstruction that might one
day break asunder?

It might be so; he tried to keep his grasp on that hope.  For, since the
day when he had first walked feebly from his couch of straw, and had
felt a new darkness within him under the sunlight, his mind had
undergone changes, partly gradual and persistent, partly sudden and
fleeting.  As he had recovered his strength of body, he had recovered
his self-command and the energy of his will; he had recovered the memory
of all that part of his life which was closely enwrought with his
emotions; and he had felt more and more constantly and painfully the
uneasy sense of lost knowledge.  But more than that--once or twice, when
he had been strongly excited, he had seemed momentarily to be in entire
possession of his past self, as old men doze for an instant and get back
the consciousness of their youth: he seemed again to see Greek pages and
understand them, again to feel his mind moving unbenumbed among familiar
ideas.  It had been but a flash, and the darkness closing in again
seemed the more horrible; but might not the same thing happen again for
longer periods?  If it would only come and stay long enough for him to
achieve a revenge--devise an exquisite suffering, such as a mere right
arm could never inflict!

He raised himself from his stooping attitude, and, folding his arms,
attempted to concentrate all his mental force on the plan he must
immediately pursue.  He had to wait for knowledge and opportunity, and
while he waited he must have the means of living without beggary.  What
he dreaded of all things now was, that any one should think him a
foolish, helpless old man.  No one must know that half his memory was
gone: the lost strength might come again; and if it were only for a
little while, _that_ might be enough.

He knew how to begin to get the information he wanted about Tito.  He
had repeated the words "Bratti Ferravecchi" so constantly after they had
been uttered to him, that they never slipped from him for long together.
A man at Genoa, on whose finger he had seen Tito's ring, had told him
that he bought that ring at Florence, of a young Greek, well-dressed,
and with a handsome dark face, in the shop of a _rigattiere_ called
Bratti Ferravecchi, in the street also called Ferravecchi.  This
discovery had caused a violent agitation in Baldassarre.  Until then he
had clung with all the tenacity of his fervent nature to his faith in
Tito, and had not for a moment believed himself to be wilfully forsaken.
At first he had said, "My bit of parchment has never reached him; that
is why I am still toiling at Antioch, But he is searching; he knows
where I was lost: he will trace me out, and find me at last."  Then,
when he was taken to Corinth, he induced his owners, by the assurance
that he should be sought out and ransomed, to provide securely against
the failure of any inquiries that might be made about him at Antioch;
and at Corinth he thought joyfully, "Here, at last, he must find me.
Here he is sure to touch, whichever way he goes."  But before another
year had passed, the illness had come from which he had risen with body
and mind so shattered that he was worse than worthless to his owners,
except for the sake of the ransom that did not come.  Then, as he sat
helpless in the morning sunlight, he began to think, "Tito has been
drowned, or they have made _him_ a prisoner too.  I shall see him no
more.  He set out after me, but misfortune overtook him.  I shall see
his face no more."  Sitting in his new feebleness and despair,
supporting his head between his hands, with blank eyes and lips that
moved uncertainly, he looked so much like a hopelessly imbecile old man,
that his owners were contented to be rid of him, and allowed a Genoese
merchant, who had compassion on him as an Italian, to take him on board
his galley.  In a voyage of many months in the Archipelago and along the
seaboard of Asia Minor, Baldassarre had recovered his bodily strength,
but on landing at Genoa he had so weary a sense of his desolateness that
he almost wished he had died of that illness at Corinth.  There was just
one possibility that hindered the wish from being decided: it was that
Tito might not be dead, but living in a state of imprisonment or
destitution; and if he lived, there was still a hope for Baldassarre--
faint, perhaps, and likely to be long deferred, but still a hope, that
he might find his child, his cherished son again; might yet again clasp
hands and meet face to face with the one being who remembered him as he
had been before his mind was broken.  In this state of feeling he had
chanced to meet the stranger who wore Tito's onyx ring, and though
Baldassarre would have been unable to describe the ring beforehand, the
sight of it stirred the dormant fibres, and he recognised it.  That Tito
nearly a year after his father had been parted from him should have been
living in apparent prosperity at Florence, selling the gem which he
ought not to have sold till the last extremity, was a fact that
Baldassarre shrank from trying to account for: he was glad to be stunned
and bewildered by it, rather than to have any distinct thought; he tried
to feel nothing but joy that he should behold Tito again.  Perhaps Tito
had thought that his father was dead; somehow the mystery would be
explained.  "But at least I shall meet eyes that will remember me.  I am
not alone in the world."

And now again Baldassarre said, "I am not alone in the world; I shall
never be alone, for my revenge is with me."

It was as the instrument of that revenge, as something merely external
and subservient to his true life, that he bent down again to examine
himself with hard curiosity--not, he thought, because he had any care
for a withered, forsaken old man, whom nobody loved, whose soul was like
a deserted home, where the ashes were cold upon the hearth, and the
walls were bare of all but the marks of what had been.  It is in the
nature of all human passion, the lowest as well as the highest, that
there is a point where it ceases to be properly egoistic, and is like a
fire kindled within our being to which everything else in us is mere
fuel.

He looked at the pale black-browed image in the water till he identified
it with that self from which his revenge seemed to be a thing apart; and
he felt as if the image too heard the silent language of his thought.

"I was a loving fool--I worshipped a woman once, and believed she could
care for me; and then I took a helpless child and fostered him; and I
watched him as he grew, to see if he would care for me only a little--
care for _me_ over and above the good he got from me.  I would have torn
open my breast to warm him with my life-blood if I could only have seen
him care a little for the pain of my wound.  I have laboured, I have
strained to crush out of this hard life one drop of unselfish love.
Fool! men love their own delights; there is no delight to be had in me.
And yet I watched till I believed I saw what I watched for.  When he was
a child he lifted soft eyes towards me, and held my hand willingly: I
thought, this boy will surely love me a little: because I give my life
to him and strive that he shall know no sorrow, he will care a little
when I am thirsty--the drop he lays on my parched lips will be a joy to
him...  Curses on him!  I wish I may see him lie with those red lips
white and dry as ashes, and when he looks for pity I wish he may see my
face rejoicing in his pain.  It is all a lie--this world is a lie--there
is no goodness but in hate.  Fool! not one drop of love came with all
your striving: life has not given you one drop.  But there are deep
draughts in this world for hatred and revenge.  I have memory left for
that, and there is strength in my arm--there is strength in my will--and
if I can do nothing but kill him--"

But Baldassarre's mind rejected the thought of that brief punishment.
His whole soul had been thrilled into immediate unreasoning belief in
that eternity of vengeance where he, an undying hate, might clutch for
ever an undying traitor, and hear that fair smiling hardness cry and
moan with anguish.  But the primary need and hope was to see a slow
revenge under the same sky and on the same earth where he himself had
been forsaken and had fainted with despair.  And as soon as he tried to
concentrate his mind on the means of attaining his end, the sense of his
weakness pressed upon him like a frosty ache.  This despised body, which
was to be the instrument of a sublime vengeance, must be nourished and
decently clad.  If he had to wait he must labour, and his labour must be
of a humble sort, for he had no skill.  He wondered whether the sight of
written characters would so stimulate his faculties that he might
venture to try and find work as a copyist: _that_ might win him some
credence for his past scholarship.  But no! he dared trust neither hand
nor brain.  He must be content to do the work that was most like that of
a beast of burden: in this mercantile city many porters must be wanted,
and he could at least carry weights.  Thanks to the justice that
struggled in this confused world in behalf of vengeance, his limbs had
got back some of their old sturdiness.  He was stripped of all else that
men would give coin for.

But the new urgency of this habitual thought brought a new suggestion.
There was something hanging by a cord round his bare neck; something
apparently so paltry that the piety of Turks and Frenchmen had spared
it--a tiny parchment bag blackened with age.  It had hung round his neck
as a precious charm when he was a boy, and he had kept it carefully on
his breast, not believing that it contained anything but a tiny scroll
of parchment rolled up hard.  He might long ago have thrown it away as a
relic of his dead mother's superstition; but he had thought of it as a
relic of her love, and had kept it.  It was part of the piety associated
with such _brevi_, that they should never be opened, and at any previous
moment in his life Baldassarre would have said that no sort of thirst
would prevail upon him to open this little bag for the chance of finding
that it contained, not parchment, but an engraved amulet which would be
worth money.  But now a thirst had come like that which makes men open
their own veins to satisfy it, and the thought of the possible amulet no
sooner crossed Baldassarre's mind than with nervous fingers he snatched
the _breve_ from his neck.  It all rushed through his mind--the long
years he had worn it, the far-off sunny balcony at Naples looking
towards the blue waters, where he had leaned against his mother's knee;
but it made no moment of hesitation: all piety now was transmuted into a
just revenge.  He bit and tore till the doubles of parchment were laid
open, and then--it was a sight that made him pant--there _was_ an
amulet.  It was very small, but it was as blue as those far-off waters;
it was an engraved sapphire, which must be worth some gold ducats.
Baldassarre no sooner saw those possible ducats than he saw some of them
exchanged for a poniard.  He did not want to use the poniard yet, but he
longed to possess it.  If he could grasp its handle and try its edge,
that blank in his mind--that past which fell away continually--would not
make him feel so cruelly helpless: the sharp steel that despised talents
and eluded strength would be at his side, as the unfailing friend of
feeble justice.  There was a sparkling triumph under Baldassarre's black
eyebrows as he replaced the little sapphire inside the bits of parchment
and wound the string tightly round them.

It was nearly dusk now, and he rose to walk back towards Florence.  With
his _danari_ to buy him some bread, he felt rich: he could lie out in
the open air, as he found plenty more doing in all corners of Florence.
And in the next few days he had sold his sapphire, had added to his
clothing, had bought a bright dagger, and had still a pair of gold
florins left.  But he meant to hoard that treasure carefully: his
lodging was an outhouse with a heap of straw in it, in a thinly
inhabited part of Oltrarno, and he thought of looking about for work as
a porter.

He had bought his dagger at Bratti's.  Paying his meditated visit there
one evening at dusk, he had found that singular rag-merchant just
returned from one of his rounds, emptying out his basketful of broken
glass and old iron amongst his handsome show of miscellaneous
second-hand goods.  As Baldassarre entered the shop, and looked towards
the smart pieces of apparel, the musical instruments, and weapons, which
were displayed in the broadest light of the window, his eye at once
singled out a dagger hanging up high against a red scarf.  By buying the
dagger he could not only satisfy a strong desire, he could open his
original errand in a more indirect manner than by speaking of the onyx
ring.  In the course of bargaining for the weapon, he let drop, with
cautious carelessness, that he came from Genoa, and had been directed to
Bratti's shop by an acquaintance in that city who had bought a very
valuable ring here.  Had the respectable trader any more such rings?

Whereupon Bratti had much to say as to the unlikelihood of such rings
being within reach of many people, with much vaunting of his own rare
connections, due to his known wisdom, and honesty.  It might be true
that he was a pedlar--he chose to be a pedlar; though he was rich enough
to kick his heels in his shop all day.  But those who thought they had
said all there was to be said about Bratti when they had called him a
pedlar, were a good deal further off the truth than the other side of
Pisa.  How was it that he could put that ring in a stranger's way?  It
was, because he had a very particular knowledge of a handsome young
signor, who did not look quite so fine a feathered bird when Bratti
first set eyes on him as he did at the present time.  And by a question
or two Baldassarre extracted, without any trouble, such a rough and
rambling account of Tito's life as the pedlar could give, since the time
when he had found him sleeping under the Loggia de' Cerchi.  It never
occurred to Bratti that the decent man (who was rather deaf, apparently,
asking him to say many things twice over) had any curiosity about Tito;
the curiosity was doubtless about himself, as a truly remarkable pedlar.

And Baldassarre left Bratti's shop, not only with the dagger at his
side, but also with a general knowledge of Tito's conduct and position--
of his early sale of the jewels, his immediate quiet settlement of
himself at Florence, his marriage, and his great prosperity.

"What story had he told about his previous life--about his father?"

It would be difficult for Baldassarre to discover the answer to that
question.  Meanwhile, he wanted to learn all he could about Florence.
But he found, to his acute distress, that of the new details he learned
he could only retain a few, and those only by continual repetition; and
he began to be afraid of listening to any new discourse, lest it should
obliterate what he was already striving to remember.

The day he was discerned by Tito in the Piazza del Duomo, he had the
fresh anguish of this consciousness in his mind, and Tito's ready speech
fell upon him like the mockery of a glib, defying demon.

As he went home to his heap of straw, and passed by the booksellers'
shops in the Via del Garbo, he paused to look at the volumes spread
open.  Could he by long gazing at one of those books lay hold of the
slippery threads of memory?  Could he, by striving, get a firm grasp
somewhere, and lift himself above these waters that flowed over him?

He was tempted, and bought the cheapest Greek book he could see.  He
carried it home and sat on his heap of straw, looking at the characters
by the light of the small window; but no inward light arose on them.
Soon the evening darkness came; but it made little difference to
Baldassarre.  His strained eyes seemed still to see the white pages with
the unintelligible black marks upon them.



CHAPTER THIRTY ONE.

FRUIT IS SEED.

"My Romola," said Tito, the second morning after he had made his speech
in the Piazza del Duomo, "I am to receive grand visitors to-day; the
Milanese Count is coming again, and the Seneschal de Beaucaire, the
great favourite of the Cristianissimo.  I know you don't care to go
through smiling ceremonies with these rustling magnates, whom we are not
likely to see again; and as they will want to look at the antiquities
and the library, perhaps you had better give up your work to-day, and go
to see your cousin Brigida."

Romola discerned a wish in this intimation, and immediately assented.
But presently, coming back in her hood and mantle, she said, "Oh, what a
long breath Florence will take when the gates are flung open, and the
last Frenchman is walking out of them!  Even you are getting tired, with
all your patience, my Tito; confess it.  Ah, your head is hot."

He was leaning over his desk, writing, and she had laid her hand on his
head, meaning to give a parting caress.  The attitude had been a
frequent one, and Tito was accustomed, when he felt her hand there, to
raise his head, throw himself a little backward, and look up at her.
But he felt now as unable to raise his head as if her hand had been a
leaden cowl.  He spoke instead, in a light tone, as his pen still ran
along.

"The French are as ready to go from Florence as the wasps to leave a
ripe pear when they have just fastened on it."

Romola, keenly sensitive to the absence of the usual response, took away
her hand and said, "I am going, Tito."

"Farewell, my sweet one.  I must wait at home.  Take Maso with you."

Still Tito did not look up, and Romola went out without saying any more.
Very slight things make Epochs in married life, and this morning for
the first time she admitted to herself not only that Tito had changed,
but that he had changed towards her.  Did the reason lie in herself?
She might perhaps have thought so, if there had not been the facts of
the armour and the picture to suggest some external event which was an
entire mystery to her.

But Tito no sooner believed that Romola was out of the house than he
laid down his pen and looked up, in delightful security from seeing
anything else than parchment and broken marble.  He was rather disgusted
with himself that he had not been able to look up at Romola and behave
to her just as usual.  He would have chosen, if he could, to be even
more than usually kind; but he could not, on a sudden, master an
involuntary shrinking from her, which, by a subtle relation, depended on
those very characteristics in him that made him desire not to fail in
his marks of affection.  He was about to take a step which he knew would
arouse her deep indignation; he would have to encounter much that was
unpleasant before he could win her forgiveness.  And Tito could never
find it easy to face displeasure and anger; his nature was one of those
most remote from defiance or impudence, and all his inclinations leaned
towards preserving Romola's tenderness.  He was not tormented by
sentimental scruples which, as he had demonstrated to himself by a very
rapid course of argument, had no relation to solid utility; but his
freedom from scruples did not release him from the dread of what was
disagreeable.  Unscrupulousness gets rid of much, but not of toothache,
or wounded vanity, or the sense of loneliness, against which, as the
world at present stands, there is no security but a thoroughly healthy
jaw, and a just, loving soul.  And Tito was feeling intensely at this
moment that no devices could save him from pain in the impending
collision with Romola; no persuasive blandness could cushion him against
the shock towards which he was being driven like a timid animal urged to
a desperate leap by the terror of the tooth and the claw that are close
behind it.

The secret feeling he had previously had that the tenacious adherence to
Bardo's wishes about the library had become under existing difficulties
a piece of sentimental folly, which deprived himself and Romola of
substantial advantages, might perhaps never have wrought itself into
action but for the events of the past week, which had brought at once
the pressure of a new motive and the outlet of a rare opportunity.  Nay,
it was not till his dread had been aggravated by the sight of
Baldassarre looking more like his sane self, not until he had begun to
feel that he might be compelled to flee from Florence, that he had
brought himself to resolve on using his legal right to sell the library
before the great opportunity offered by French and Milanese bidders
slipped through his fingers.  For if he had to leave Florence he did not
want to leave it as a destitute wanderer.  He had been used to an
agreeable existence, and he wished to carry with him all the means at
hand for retaining the same agreeable conditions.  He wished among other
things to carry Romola with him, and _not_, if possible, to carry any
infamy.  Success had given him a growing appetite for all the pleasures
that depend on an advantageous social position, and at no moment could
it look like a temptation to him, but only like a hideous alternative,
to decamp under dishonour, even with a bag of diamonds, and incur the
life of an adventurer.  It was not possible for him to make himself
independent even of those Florentines who only greeted him with regard;
still less was it possible for him to make himself independent of
Romola.  She was the wife of his first love--he loved her still; she
belonged to that furniture of life which he shrank from parting with.
He winced under her judgment, he felt uncertain how far the revulsion of
her feeling towards him might go; and all that sense of power over a
wife which makes a husband risk betrayals that a lover never ventures
on, would not suffice to counteract Tito's uneasiness.  This was the
leaden weight which had been too strong for his will, and kept him from
raising his head to meet her eyes.  Their pure light brought too near
him the prospect of a coming struggle.  But it was not to be helped; if
they had to leave Florence, they must have money; indeed, Tito could not
arrange life at all to his mind without a considerable sum of money.
And that problem of arranging life to his mind had been the source of
all his misdoing.  He would have been equal to any sacrifice that was
not unpleasant.

The rustling magnates came and went, the bargains had been concluded,
and Romola returned home; but nothing grave was said that night.  Tito
was only gay and chatty, pouring forth to her, as he had not done
before, stories and descriptions of what he had witnessed during the
French visit.  Romola thought she discerned an effort in his liveliness,
and attributing it to the consciousness in him that she had been wounded
in the morning, accepted the effort as an act of penitence, inwardly
aching a little at that sign of growing distance between them--that
there was an offence about which neither of them dared to speak.

The next day Tito remained away from home until late at night.  It was a
marked day to Romola, for Piero di Cosimo, stimulated to greater
industry on her behalf by the fear that he might have been the cause of
pain to her in the past week, had sent home her father's portrait.  She
had propped it against the back of his old chair, and had been looking
at it for some time, when the door opened behind her, and Bernardo del
Nero came in.

"It is you, godfather!  How I wish you had come sooner! it is getting a
little dusk," said Romola, going towards him.

"I have just looked in to tell you the good news, for I know Tito has
not come yet," said Bernardo.  "The French king moves off to-morrow: not
before it is high time.  There has been another tussle between our
people and his soldiers this morning.  But there's a chance now of the
city getting into order once more and trade going on."

"That is joyful," said Romola.  "But it is sudden, is it not?  Tito
seemed to think yesterday that there was little prospect of the king's
going soon."

"He has been well barked at, that's the reason," said Bernardo, smiling.
"His own generals opened their throats pretty well, and at last our
Signoria sent the mastiff of the city, Fra Girolamo.  The Cristianissimo
was frightened at that thunder, and has given the order to move.  I'm
afraid there'll be small agreement among us when he's gone, but, at any
rate, all parties are agreed in being glad not to have Florence stifled
with soldiery any longer, and the Frate has barked this time to some
purpose.  Ah, what is this?" he added, as Romola, clasping him by the
arm, led him in front of the picture.  "Let us see."

He began to unwind his long scarf while she placed a seat for him.

"Don't you want your spectacles, godfather?" said Romola, in anxiety
that he should see just what she saw.

"No, child, no," said Bernardo, uncovering his grey head, as he seated
himself with firm erectness.  "For seeing at this distance, my old eyes
are perhaps better than your young ones.  Old men's eyes are like old
men's memories; they are strongest for things a long way off."

"It is better than having no portrait," said Romola, apologetically,
after Bernardo had been silent a little while.  "It is less like him now
than the image I have in my mind, but then that might fade with the
years."  She rested her arm on the old man's shoulder as she spoke,
drawn towards him strongly by their common interest in the dead.

"I don't know," said Bernardo.  "I almost think I see Bardo as he was
when he was young, better than that picture shows him to me as he was
when he was old.  Your father had a great deal of fire in his eyes when
he was young.  It was what I could never understand, that he, with his
fiery spirit, which seemed much more impatient than mine, could hang
over the books and live with shadows all his life.  However, he had put
his heart into that."

Bernardo gave a slight shrug as he spoke the last words, but Romola
discerned in his voice a feeling that accorded with her own.

"And he was disappointed to the last," she said, involuntarily.  But
immediately fearing lest her words should be taken to imply an
accusation against Tito, she went on almost hurriedly, "If we could only
see his longest, dearest wish fulfilled just to his mind!"

"Well, so we may," said Bernardo, kindly, rising and putting on his cap.
"The times are cloudy now, but fish are caught by waiting.  Who knows?
When the wheel has turned often enough, I may be Gonfaloniere yet before
I die; and no creditor can touch these things."  He looked round as he
spoke.  Then, turning to her, and patting her cheek, said, "And you need
not be afraid of my dying; my ghost will claim nothing.  I've taken care
of that in my will."

Romola seized the hand that was against her cheek, and put it to her
lips in silence.

"Haven't you been scolding your husband for keeping away from home so
much lately?  I see him everywhere but here," said Bernardo, willing to
change the subject.

She felt the flush spread over her neck and face as she said, "He has
been very much wanted; you know he speaks so well.  I am glad to know
that his value is understood."

"You are contented then, Madonna Orgogliosa?" said Bernardo, smiling, as
he moved to the door.

"Assuredly."

Poor Romola!  There was one thing that would have made the pang of
disappointment in her husband harder to bear; it was, that any one
should know he gave her cause for disappointment.  This might be a
woman's weakness, but it is closely allied to a woman's nobleness.  She
who willingly lifts up the veil of her married life has profaned it from
a sanctuary into a vulgar place.



CHAPTER THIRTY TWO.

A REVELATION.

The next day Romola, like every other Florentine, was excited about the
departure of the French.  Besides her other reasons for gladness, she
had a dim hope, which she was conscious was half superstitious, that
those new anxieties about Tito, having come with the burdensome guests,
might perhaps vanish with them.  The French had been in Florence hardly
eleven days, but in that space she had felt more acute unhappiness than
she had known in her life before.  Tito had adopted the hateful armour
on the day of their arrival, and though she could frame no distinct
notion why their departure should remove the cause of his fear--though,
when she thought of that cause, the image of the prisoner grasping him,
as she had seen it in Piero's sketch, urged itself before her and
excluded every other--still, when the French were gone, she would be rid
of something that was strongly associated with her pain.

Wrapped in her mantle she waited under the loggia at the top of the
house, and watched for the glimpses of the troops and the royal retinue
passing the bridges on their way to the Porta San Piero, that looks
towards Siena and Rome.  She even returned to her station when the gates
had been closed, that she might feel herself vibrating with the great
peal of the bells.  It was dusk then, and when at last she descended
into the library, she lit her lamp with the resolution that she would
overcome the agitation which had made her idle all day, and sit down to
work at her copying of the catalogue.  Tito had left home early in the
morning, and she did not expect him yet.  Before he came she intended to
leave the library, and sit in the pretty saloon, with the dancing nymphs
and the birds.  She had done so every evening since he had objected to
the library as chill and gloomy.

To her great surprise, she had not been at work long before Tito
entered.  Her first thought was, how cheerless he would feel in the wide
darkness of this great room, with one little oil-lamp burning at the
further end, and the fire nearly out.  She almost ran towards him.

"Tito, dearest, I did not know you would come so soon," she said,
nervously, putting up her white arms to unwind his becchetto.

"I am not welcome then?" he said, with one of his brightest smiles,
clasping her, but playfully holding his head back from her.

"Tito!"  She uttered the word in a tone of pretty, loving reproach, and
then he kissed her fondly, stroked her hair, as his manner was, and
seemed not to mind about taking off his mantle yet.  Romola quivered
with delight.  All the emotions of the day had been preparing in her a
keener sensitiveness to the return of this habitual manner.  "It will
come back," she was saying to herself, "the old happiness will perhaps
come back.  He is like himself again."

Tito was taking great pains to be like himself; his heart was
palpitating with anxiety.

"If I had expected you so soon," said Romola, as she at last helped him
to take off his wrappings, "I would have had a little festival prepared
to this joyful ringing of the bells.  I did not mean to be here in the
library when you came home."

"Never mind, sweet," he said, carelessly.  "Do not think about the fire.
Come--come and sit down."

There was a low stool against Tito's chair, and that was Romola's
habitual seat when they were talking together.  She rested her arm on
his knee, as she used to do on her father's, and looked up at him while
he spoke.  He had never yet noticed the presence of the portrait, and
she had not mentioned it--thinking of it all the more.

"I have been enjoying the clang of the bells for the first time, Tito,"
she began.  "I liked being shaken and deafened by them: I fancied I was
something like a Bacchante possessed by a divine rage.  Are not the
people looking very joyful to-night?"

"Joyful after a sour and pious fashion," said Tito, with a shrug.  "But,
in truth, those who are left behind in Florence have little cause to be
joyful: it seems to me, the most reasonable ground of gladness would be
to have got out of Florence."

Tito had sounded the desired key-note without any trouble, or appearance
of premeditation.  He spoke with no emphasis, but he looked grave enough
to make Romola ask rather anxiously--

"Why, Tito?  Are there fresh troubles?"

"No need of fresh ones, my Romola.  There are three strong parties in
the city, all ready to fly at each other's throats.  And if the Frate's
party is strong enough to frighten the other two into silence, as seems
most likely, life will be as pleasant and amusing as a funeral.  They
have the plan of a Great Council simmering already; and if they get it,
the man who sings sacred Lauds the loudest will be the most eligible for
office.  And besides that, the city will be so drained by the payment of
this great subsidy to the French king, and by the war to get back Pisa,
that the prospect would be dismal enough without the rule of fanatics.
On the whole, Florence will be a delightful place for those worthies who
entertain themselves in the evening by going into crypts and lashing
themselves; but for everything else, the exiles have the best of it.
For my own part, I have been thinking seriously that we should be wise
to quit Florence, my Romola."

She started.  "Tito, how could we leave Florence?  Surely you do not
think I could leave it--at least, not yet--not for a long while."  She
had turned cold and trembling, and did not find it quite easy to speak.
Tito must know the reasons she had in her mind.

"That is all a fabric of your own imagination, my sweet one.  Your
secluded life has made you lay such false stress on a few things.  You
know I used to tell you, before we were married, that I wished we were
somewhere else than in Florence.  If you had seen more places and more
people, you would know what I mean when I say that there is something in
the Florentines that reminds me of their cutting spring winds.  I like
people who take life less eagerly; and it would be good for my Romola,
too, to see a new life.  I should like to dip her a little in the soft
waters of forgetfulness."

He leaned forward and kissed her brow, and laid his hand on her fair
hair again; but she felt his caress no more than if he had kissed a
mask.  She was too much agitated by the sense of the distance between
their minds to be conscious that his lips touched her.

"Tito, it is not because I suppose Florence is the pleasantest place in
the world that I desire not to quit it.  It is because I--because we
have to see my father's wish fulfilled.  My godfather is old; he is
seventy-one; we could not leave it to him."

"It is precisely those superstitions which hang about your mind like
bedimming clouds, my Romola, that make one great reason why I could wish
we were two hundred leagues from Florence.  I am obliged to take care of
you in opposition to your own will: if those dear eyes, that look so
tender, see falsely, I must see for them, and save my wife from wasting
her life in disappointing herself by impracticable dreams."

Romola sat silent and motionless: she could not blind herself to the
direction in which Tito's words pointed: he wanted to persuade her that
they might get the library deposited in some monastery, or take some
other ready means to rid themselves of a task, and of a tie to Florence;
and she was determined never to submit her mind to his judgment on this
question of duty to her father; she was inwardly prepared to encounter
any sort of pain in resistance.  But the determination was kept latent
in these first moments by the heart-crushing sense that now at last she
and Tito must be confessedly divided in their wishes.  He was glad of
her silence; for, much as he had feared the strength of her feeling, it
was impossible for him, shut up in the narrowness that hedges in all
merely clever, unimpassioned men, not to over-estimate the
persuasiveness of his own arguments.  His conduct did not look ugly to
himself, and his imagination did not suffice to show him exactly how it
would look to Romola.  He went on in the same gentle, remonstrating
tone.

"You know, dearest--your own clear judgment always showed you--that the
notion of isolating a collection of books and antiquities, and attaching
a single name to them for ever, was one that had no valid, substantial
good for its object: and yet more, one that was liable to be defeated in
a thousand ways.  See what has become of the Medici collections!  And,
for my part, I consider it even blameworthy to entertain those petty
views of appropriation: why should any one be reasonably glad that
Florence should possess the benefits of learned research and taste more
than any other city?  I understand your feeling about the wishes of the
dead; but wisdom puts a limit to these sentiments, else lives might be
continually wasted in that sort of futile devotion--like praising deaf
gods for ever.  You gave your life to your father while he lived; why
should you demand more of yourself?"

"Because it was a trust," said Romola, in a low but distinct voice.  "He
trusted me, he trusted you, Tito.  I did not expect you to feel anything
else about it--to feel as I do--but I did expect you to feel that."

"Yes, dearest, of course I should feel it on a point where your father's
real welfare or happiness was concerned; but there is no question of
that now.  If we believed in purgatory, I should be as anxious as you to
have masses said; and if I believed it could now pain your father to see
his library preserved and used in a rather different way from what he
had set his mind on, I should share the strictness of your views.  But a
little philosophy should teach us to rid ourselves of those air-woven
fetters that mortals hang round themselves, spending their lives in
misery under the mere imagination of weight.  Your mind, which seizes
ideas so readily, my Romola, is able to discriminate between substantial
good and these brain-wrought fantasies.  Ask yourself, dearest, what
possible good can these books and antiquities do, stowed together under
your father's name in Florence, more than they would do if they were
divided or carried elsewhere?  Nay, is not the very dispersion of such
things in hands that know how to value them, one means of extending
their usefulness?  This rivalry of Italian cities is very petty and
illiberal.  The loss of Constantinople was the gain of the whole
civilised world."

Romola was still too thoroughly under the painful pressure of the new
revelation Tito was making of himself, for her resistance to find any
strong vent.  As that fluent talk fell on her ears there was a rising
contempt within her, which only made her more conscious of her bruised,
despairing love, her love for the Tito she had married and believed in.
Her nature, possessed with the energies of strong emotion, recoiled from
this hopelessly shallow readiness which professed to appropriate the
widest sympathies and had no pulse for the nearest.  She still spoke
like one who was restrained from showing all she felt.  She had only
drawn away her arm from his knee, and sat with her hands clasped before
her, cold and motionless as locked waters.

"You talk of substantial good, Tito!  Are faithfulness, and love, and
sweet grateful memories, no good?  Is it no good that we should keep our
silent promises on which others build because they believe in our love
and truth?  Is it no good that a just life should be justly honoured?
Or, is it good that we should harden our hearts against all the wants
and hopes of those who have depended on us?  What good can belong to men
who have such souls?  To talk cleverly, perhaps, and find soft couches
for themselves, and live and die with their base selves as their best
companions."

Her voice had gradually risen till there was a ring of scorn in the last
words; she made a slight pause, but he saw there were other words
quivering on her lips, and he chose to let them come.

"I know of no good for cities or the world if they are to be made up of
such beings.  But I am not thinking of other Italian cities and the
whole civilised world--I am thinking of my father, and of my love and
sorrow for him, and of his just claims on us.  I would give up anything
else, Tito,--I would leave Florence,--what else did I live for but for
him and you?  But I will not give up that duty.  What have I to do with
your arguments?  It was a yearning of _his_ heart, and therefore it is a
yearning of mine."

Her voice, from having been tremulous, had become full and firm.  She
felt that she had been urged on to say all that it was needful for her
to say.  She thought, poor thing, there was nothing harder to come than
this struggle against Tito's suggestions as against the meaner part of
herself.

He had begun to see clearly that he could not persuade her into assent:
he must take another course, and show her that the time for resistance
was past.  That, at least, would put an end to further struggle; and if
the disclosure were not made by himself to-night, to-morrow it must be
made in another way.  This necessity nerved his courage; and his
experience of her affectionateness and unexpected submissiveness, ever
since their marriage until now, encouraged him to hope that, at last,
she would accommodate herself to what had been his will.

"I am sorry to hear you speak in that spirit of blind persistence, my
Romola," he said, quietly, "because it obliges me to give you pain.  But
I partly foresaw your opposition, and as a prompt decision was
necessary, I avoided that obstacle, and decided without consulting you.
The very care of a husband for his wife's interest compels him to that
separate action sometimes--even when he has such a wife as you, my
Romola."

She turned her eyes on him in breathless inquiry.

"I mean," he said, answering her look, "that I have arranged for the
transfer, both of the books and of the antiquities, where they will find
the highest use and value.  The books have been bought for the Duke of
Milan, the marbles and bronzes and the rest are going to France: and
both will be protected by the stability of a great Power, instead of
remaining in a city which is exposed to ruin."

Before he had finished speaking, Romola had started from her seat, and
stood up looking down at him, with tightened hands falling before her,
and, for the first time in her life, with a flash of fierceness in her
scorn and anger.

"You have _sold_ them?" she asked, as if she distrusted her ears.

"I have," said Tito, quailing a little.  The scene was unpleasant--the
descending scorn already scorched him.

"You are a treacherous man!" she said, with something grating in her
voice, as she looked down at him.

She was silent for a minute, and he sat still, feeling that ingenuity
was powerless just now.  Suddenly she turned away, and said in an
agitated tone, "It may be hindered--I am going to my godfather."

In an instant Tito started up, went to the door, locked it, and took out
the key.  It was time for all the masculine predominance that was latent
in him to show itself.  But he was not angry; he only felt that the
moment was eminently unpleasant, and that when this scene was at an end
he should be glad to keep away from Romola for a little while.  But it
was absolutely necessary first that she should be reduced to
passiveness.

"Try to calm yourself a little, Romola," he said, leaning in the easiest
attitude possible against a pedestal under the bust of a grim old Roman.
Not that he was inwardly easy: his heart palpitated with a moral dread,
against which no chain-armour could be found.  He had locked-in his
wife's anger and scorn, but he had been obliged to lock himself in with
it; and his blood did not rise with contest--his olive cheek was
perceptibly paled.

Romola had paused and turned her eyes on him as she saw him take his
stand and lodge the key in his scarsella.  Her eyes were flashing, and
her whole frame seemed to be possessed by impetuous force that wanted to
leap out in some deed.  All the crushing pain of disappointment in her
husband, which had made the strongest part of her consciousness a few
minutes before, was annihilated by the vehemence of her indignation.
She could not care in this moment that the man she was despising as he
leaned there in his loathsome beauty--she could not care that he was her
husband; she could only feel that she despised him.  The pride and
fierceness of the old Bardo blood had been thoroughly awaked in her for
the first time.

"Try at least to understand the fact," said Tito, "and do not seek to
take futile steps which may be fatal.  It is of no use for you to go to
your godfather.  Messer Bernardo cannot reverse what I have done.  Only
sit down.  You would hardly wish, if you were quite yourself, to make
known to any third person what passes between us in private."

Tito knew that he had touched the right fibre there.  But she did not
sit down; she was too unconscious of her body voluntarily to change her
attitude.

"Why can it not be reversed?" she said, after a pause.  "Nothing is
moved yet."

"Simply because the sale has been concluded by written agreement; the
purchasers have left Florence, and I hold the bonds for the
purchase-money."

"If my father had suspected you of being a faithless man," said Romola,
in a tone of bitter scorn, which insisted on darting out before she
could say anything else, "he would have placed the library safely out of
your power.  But death overtook him too soon, and when you were sure his
ear was deaf, and his hand stiff, you robbed him."  She paused an
instant, and then said, with gathered passion, "Have you robbed somebody
else, who is _not_ dead?  Is that the reason you wear armour?"

Romola had been driven to utter the words as men are driven to use the
lash of the horsewhip.  At first, Tito felt horribly cowed; it seemed to
him that the disgrace he had been dreading would be worse than he had
imagined it.  But soon there was a reaction: such power of dislike and
resistance as there was within him was beginning to rise against a wife
whose voice seemed like the herald of a retributive fate.  Her, at
least, his quick mind told him that he might master.

"It is useless," he said, coolly, "to answer the words of madness,
Romola.  Your peculiar feeling about your father has made you mad at
this moment.  Any rational person looking at the case from a due
distance will see that I have taken the wisest course.  Apart from the
influence of your exaggerated feelings on him, I am convinced that
Messer Bernardo would be of that opinion."

"He would not!" said Romola.  "He lives in the hope of seeing my
father's wish exactly fulfilled.  We spoke of it together only
yesterday.  He will help me yet.  Who are these men to whom you have
sold my father's property?"

"There is no reason why you should not be told, except that it signifies
little.  The Count di San Severino and the Seneschal de Beaucaire are
now on their way with the king to Siena."

"They may be overtaken and persuaded to give up their purchase," said
Romola, eagerly, her anger beginning to be surmounted by anxious
thought.

"No, they may not," said Tito, with cool decision.

"Why?"

"Because I do not choose that they should."

"But if you were paid the money?--we will pay you the money," said
Romola.

No words could have disclosed more fully her sense of alienation from
Tito; but they were spoken with less of bitterness than of anxious
pleading.  And he felt stronger, for he saw that the first impulse of
fury was past.

"No, my Romola.  Understand that such thoughts as these are
impracticable.  You would not, in a reasonable moment, ask your
godfather to bury three thousand florins in addition to what he has
already paid on the library.  I think your pride and delicacy would
shrink from that."

She began to tremble and turn cold again with discouragement, and sank
down on the carved chest near which she was standing.  He went on in a
clear voice, under which she shuddered, as if it had been a narrow cold
stream coursing over a hot cheek.

"Moreover, it is not my will that Messer Bernardo should advance the
money, even if the project were not an utterly wild one.  And I beg you
to consider, before you take any step or utter any word on the subject,
what will be the consequences of your placing yourself in opposition to
me, and trying to exhibit your husband in the odious light which your
own distempered feelings cast over him.  What object will you serve by
injuring me with Messer Bernardo?  The event is irrevocable, the library
is sold, and you are my wife."

Every word was spoken for the sake of a calculated effect, for his
intellect was urged into the utmost activity by the danger of the
crisis.  He knew that Romola's mind would take in rapidly enough all the
wide meaning of his speech.  He waited and watched her in silence.

She had turned her eyes from him, and was looking on the ground, and in
that way she sat for several minutes.  When she spoke, her voice was
quite altered,--it was quiet and cold.

"I have one thing to ask."

"Ask anything that I can do without injuring us both, Romola."

"That you will give me that portion of the money which belongs to my
godfather, and let me pay him."

"I must have some assurance from you, first, of the attitude you intend
to take towards me."

"Do you believe in assurances, Tito?" she said, with a tinge of
returning bitterness.

"From you, I do."

"I will do you no harm.  I shall disclose nothing.  I will say nothing
to pain him or you.  You say truly, the event is irrevocable."

"Then I will do what you desire to-morrow morning."

"To-night, if possible," said Romola, "that we may not speak of it
again."

"It is possible," he said, moving towards the lamp, while she sat still,
looking away from him with absent eyes.

Presently he came and bent down over her, to put a piece of paper into
her hand.  "You will receive something in return, you are aware, my
Romola?" he said, gently, not minding so much what had passed, now he
was secure; and feeling able to try and propitiate her.

"Yes," she said, taking the paper, without looking at him, "I
understand."

"And you will forgive me, my Romola, when you have had time to reflect."
He just touched her brow with his lips, but she took no notice, and
seemed really unconscious of the act.  She was aware that he unlocked
the door and went out.  She moved her head and listened.  The great door
of the court opened and shut again.  She started up as if some sudden
freedom had come, and going to her father's chair where his picture was
propped, fell on her knees before it, and burst into sobs.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Note.  Savonarola's Sermon, page 350.  The sermon here given is not a
translation, but a free representation of Fra Girolamo's preaching in
its more impassioned moments.

END OF THE FIRST VOLUME.



CHAPTER THIRTY THREE.

BALDASSARRE MAKES AN ACQUAINTANCE.

When Baldassarre was wandering about Florence in search of a spare
outhouse where he might have the cheapest of sheltered beds, his steps
had been attracted towards that sole portion of ground within the walls
of the city which is not perfectly level, and where the spectator,
lifted above the roofs of the houses, can see beyond the city to the
protecting hills and far-stretching valley, otherwise shut out from his
view except along the welcome opening made by the course of the Arno.
Part of that ground has been already seen by us as the hill of Bogoli,
at that time a great stone-quarry; but the side towards which
Baldassarre directed his steps was the one that sloped down behind the
Via de' Bardi, and was most commonly called the hill of San Giorgio.
Bratti had told him that Tito's dwelling was in the Via de' Bardi; and,
after surveying that street, he turned up the slope of the hill which he
had observed as he was crossing the bridge.  If he could find a
sheltering outhouse on that hill, he would be glad: he had now for some
years been accustomed to live with a broad sky about him; and, moreover,
the narrow passes of the streets, with their strip of sky above, and the
unknown labyrinth around them, seemed to intensify his sense of
loneliness and feeble memory.

The hill was sparsely inhabited, and covered chiefly by gardens; but in
one spot was a piece of rough ground jagged with great stones, which had
never been cultivated since a landslip had ruined some houses there
towards the end of the thirteenth century.  Just above the edge of this
broken ground stood a queer little square building, looking like a
truncated tower roofed in with fluted tiles, and close by was a small
outhouse, apparently built up against a piece of ruined stone wall.
Under a large half-dead mulberry-tree that was now sending its last
fluttering leaves in at the open doorways, a shrivelled, hardy old woman
was untying a goat with two kids, and Baldassarre could see that part of
the outbuilding was occupied by live stock; but the door of the other
part was open, and it was empty of everything but some tools and straw.
It was just the sort of place he wanted.  He spoke to the old woman; but
it was not till he got close to her and shouted in her ear, that he
succeeded in making her understand his want of a lodging, and his
readiness to pay for it.  At first he could get no answer beyond shakes
of the head and the words, "No--no lodging," uttered in the muffled tone
of the deaf.  But, by dint of persistence, he made clear to her that he
was a poor stranger from a long way over seas, and could not afford to
go to hostelries; that he only wanted to lie on the straw in the
outhouse, and would pay her a quattrino or two a week for that shelter.
She still looked at him dubiously, shaking her head and talking low to
herself; but presently, as if a new thought occurred to her, she fetched
a hatchet from the house, and, showing him a chump that lay half covered
with litter in a corner, asked him if he would chop that up for her: if
he would, he might lie in the outhouse for one night.  He agreed, and
Monna Lisa stood with her arms akimbo to watch him, with a smile of
gratified cunning, saying low to herself--

"It's lain there ever since my old man died.  What then?  I might as
well have put a stone on the fire.  He chops very well, though he does
speak with a foreign tongue, and looks odd.  I couldn't have got it done
cheaper.  And if he only wants a bit of straw to lie on, I might make
him do an errand or two up and down the hill.  Who need know?  And sin
that's hidden's half forgiven.  [`Peccato celato e mezzo perdonato.']
He's a stranger: he'll take no notice of _her_.  And I'll tell her to
keep her tongue still."

The antecedent to these feminine pronouns had a pair of blue eyes, which
at that moment were applied to a large round hole in the shutter of the
upper window.  The shutter was closed, not for any penal reasons, but
because only the opposite window had the luxury of glass in it: the
weather was not warm, and a round hole four inches in diameter served
all the purposes of observation.  The hole was, unfortunately, a little
too high, and obliged the small observer to stand on a low stool of a
rickety character; but Tessa would have stood a long while in a much
more inconvenient position for the sake of seeing a little variety in
her life.  She had been drawn to the opening at the first loud tones of
the strange voice speaking to Monna Lisa; and darting gently across her
room every now and then to peep at something, she continued to stand
there until the wood had been chopped, and she saw Baldassarre enter the
outhouse, as the dusk was gathering, and seat himself on the straw.

A great temptation had laid hold of Tessa's mind; she would go and take
that old man part of her supper, and talk to him a little.  He was not
deaf like Monna Lisa, and besides she could say a great many things to
him that it was no use to shout at Monna Lisa, who knew them already.
And he was a stranger--strangers came from a long way off and went away
again, and lived nowhere in particular.  It was naughty, she knew, for
obedience made the largest part in Tessa's idea of duty; but it would be
something to confess to the Padre next Pasqua, and there was nothing
else to confess except going to sleep sometimes over her beads, and
being a little cross with Monna Lisa because she was so deaf; for she
had as much idleness as she liked now, and was never frightened into
telling white lies.  She turned away from her shutter with rather an
excited expression in her childish face, which was as pretty and pouting
as ever.  Her garb was still that of a simple contadina, but of a
contadina prepared for a festa: her gown of dark-green serge, with its
red girdle, was very clean and neat; she had the string of red glass
beads round her neck; and her brown hair, rough from curliness, was duly
knotted up, and fastened with the silver pin.  She had but one new
ornament, and she was very proud of it, for it was a fine gold ring.

Tessa sat on the low stool, nursing her knees, for a minute or two, with
her little soul poised in fluttering excitement on the edge of this
pleasant transgression.  It was quite irresistible.  She had been
commanded to make no acquaintances, and warned that if she did, all her
new happy lot would vanish away, and be like a hidden treasure that
turned to lead as soon as it was brought to the daylight; and she had
been so obedient that when she had to go to church she had kept her face
shaded by her hood and had pursed up her lips quite tightly.  It was
true her obedience had been a little helped by her own dread lest the
alarming stepfather Nofri should turn up even in this quarter, so far
from the Por' del Prato, and beat her at least, if he did not drag her
back to work for him.  But this old man was not an acquaintance; he was
a poor stranger going to sleep in the outhouse, and he probably knew
nothing of stepfather Nofri; and, besides, if she took him some supper,
he would like her, and not want to tell anything about her.  Monna Lisa
would say she must not go and talk to him, therefore Monna Lisa must not
be consulted.  It did not signify what she found out after it had been
done.

Supper was being prepared, she knew--a mountain of macaroni flavoured
with cheese, fragrant enough to tame any stranger.  So she tripped
down-stairs with a mind full of deep designs, and first asking with an
innocent look what that noise of talking had been, without waiting for
an answer, knit her brow with a peremptory air, something like a kitten
trying to be formidable, and sent the old woman upstairs; saying, she
chose to eat her supper down below.  In three minutes Tessa with her
lantern in one hand and a wooden bowl of macaroni in the other, was
kicking gently at the door of the outhouse; and Baldassarre, roused from
sad reverie, doubted in the first moment whether he were awake as he
opened the door and saw this surprising little handmaid, with delight in
her wide eyes, breaking in on his dismal loneliness.

"I've brought you some supper," she said, lifting her mouth towards his
ear and shouting, as if he had been deaf like Monna Lisa.  "Sit down and
eat it, while I stay with you."

Surprise and distrust surmounted every other feeling in Baldassarre, but
though he had no smile or word of gratitude ready, there could not be
any impulse to push away this visitant, and he sank down passively on
his straw again, while Tessa placed herself close to him, put the wooden
bowl on his lap, and set down the lantern in front of them, crossing her
hands before her, and nodding at the bowl with a significant smile, as
much as to say, "Yes, you may really eat it."  For, in the excitement of
carrying out her deed, she had forgotten her previous thought that the
stranger would not be deaf, and had fallen into her habitual alternative
of dumb show and shouting.

The invitation was not a disagreeable one, for he had been gnawing a
remnant of dry bread, which had left plenty of appetite for anything
warm and relishing.  Tessa watched the disappearance of two or three
mouthfuls without speaking, for she had thought his eyes rather fierce
at first; but now she ventured to put her mouth to his ear again and
cry--

"I like my supper, don't you?"

It was not a smile, but rather the milder look of a dog touched by
kindness, but unable to smile, that Baldassarre turned on this round
blue-eyed thing that was caring about him.

"Yes," he said; "but I can hear well--I'm not deaf."

"It is true; I forgot," said Tessa, lifting her hands and clasping them.
"But Monna Lisa is deaf, and I live with her.  She's a kind old woman,
and I'm not frightened at her.  And we live very well: we have plenty of
nice things.  I can have nuts if I like.  And I'm not obliged to work
now.  I used to have to work, and I didn't like it; but I liked feeding
the mules, and I should like to see poor Giannetta, the little mule,
again.  We've only got a goat and two kids, and I used to talk to the
goat a good deal, because there was nobody else but Monna Lisa.  But now
I've got something else--can you guess what it is?"

She drew her head back, and looked with a challenging smile at
Baldassarre, as if she had proposed a difficult riddle to him.

"No," said he, putting aside his bowl, and looking at her dreamily.  It
seemed as if this young prattling thing were some memory come back out
of his own youth.

"You like me to talk to you, don't you?" said Tessa, "but you must not
tell anybody.  Shall I fetch you a bit of cold sausage?"

He shook his head, but he looked so mild now that Tessa felt quite at
her ease.

"Well, then, I've got a little baby.  Such a pretty bambinetto, with
little fingers and nails!  Not old yet; it was born at the Nativita,
Monna Lisa says.  I was married one Nativita, a long, long while ago,
and nobody knew.  O Santa Madonna!  I didn't mean to tell you that!"

Tessa set up her shoulders and bit her lip, looking at Baldassarre as if
this betrayal of secrets must have an exciting effect on him too.  But
he seemed not to care much; and perhaps that was in the nature of
strangers.

"Yes," she said, carrying on her thought aloud, "you are a stranger; you
don't live anywhere or know anybody, do you?"

"No," said Baldassarre, also thinking aloud, rather than consciously
answering, "I only know one man."

"His name is not Nofri, is it?" said Tessa, anxiously.

"No," said Baldassarre, noticing her look of fear.  "Is that your
husband's name?"

That mistaken supposition was very amusing to Tessa.  She laughed and
clapped her hands as she said--

"No, indeed!  But I must not tell you anything about my husband.  You
would never think what he is--not at all like Nofri!"

She laughed again at the delightful incongruity between the name of
Nofri--which was not separable from the idea of the cross-grained
stepfather--and the idea of her husband.

"But I don't see him very often," she went on, more gravely.  "And
sometimes I pray to the Holy Madonna to send him oftener, and once she
did.  But I must go back to my bimbo now.  I'll bring it to show you
to-morrow.  You would like to see it.  Sometimes it cries and makes a
face, but only when it's hungry, Monna Lisa says.  You wouldn't think
it, but Monna Lisa had babies once, and they are all dead old men.  My
husband says she will never die now, because she's so well dried.  I'm
glad of that, for I'm fond of her.  You would like to stay here
to-morrow, shouldn't you?"

"I should like to have this place to come and rest in, that's all," said
Baldassarre.  "I would pay for it, and harm nobody."

"No, indeed; I think you are not a bad old man.  But you look sorry
about something.  Tell me, is there anything you shall cry about when I
leave you by yourself?  _I_ used to cry once."

"No, child; I think I shall cry no more."

"That's right; and I'll bring you some breakfast, and show you the
bimbo.  Good-night."

Tessa took up her bowl and lantern, and closed the door behind her.  The
pretty loving apparition had been no more to Baldassarre than a faint
rainbow on the blackness to the man who is wrestling in deep waters.  He
hardly thought of her again till his dreamy waking passed into the more
vivid images of disturbed sleep.

But Tessa thought much of him.  She had no sooner entered the house than
she told Monna Lisa what she had done, and insisted that the stranger
should be allowed to come and rest in the outhouse when he liked.  The
old woman, who had had her notions of making him a useful tenant, made a
great show of reluctance, shook her head, and urged that Messer Naldo
would be angry if she let any one come about the house.  Tessa did not
believe that.  Naldo had said nothing against strangers who lived
nowhere; and this old man knew nobody except one person, who was not
Nofri.

"Well," conceded Monna Lisa, at last, "if I let him stay for a while and
carry things up the hill for me, thou must keep thy counsel and tell
nobody."

"No," said Tessa, "I'll only tell the bimbo."

"And then," Monna Lisa went on, in her thick undertone, "God may love us
well enough not to let Messer Naldo find out anything about it.  For he
never comes here but at dark; and as he was here two days ago, it's
likely he'll never come at all till the old man's gone away again."

"Oh me!  Monna," said Tessa, clasping her hands, "I wish Naldo had not
to go such a long, long way sometimes before he comes back again."

"Ah, child! the world's big, they say.  There are places behind the
mountains, and if people go night and day, night and day, they get to
Rome, and see the Holy Father."

Tessa looked submissive in the presence of this mystery, and began to
rock her baby, and sing syllables of vague loving meaning, in tones that
imitated a triple chime.

The next morning she was unusually industrious in the prospect of more
dialogue, and of the pleasure she should give the poor old stranger by
showing him her baby.  But before she could get ready to take
Baldassarre his breakfast, she found that Monna Lisa had been employing
him as a drawer of water.  She deferred her paternosters, and hurried
down to insist that Baldassarre should sit on his straw, so that she
might come and sit by him again while he ate his breakfast.  That
attitude made the new companionship all the more delightful to Tessa,
for she had been used to sitting on straw in old days along with her
goats and mules.

"I will not let Monna Lisa give you too much work to do," she said,
bringing him some steaming broth and soft bread.  "I don't like much
work, and I daresay you don't.  I like sitting in the sunshine and
feeding things.  Monna Lisa says, work is good, but she does it all
herself, so I don't mind.  She's not a cross old woman; you needn't be
afraid of her being cross.  And now, you eat that, and I'll go and fetch
my baby and show it you."

Presently she came back with the small mummy-case in her arms.  The
mummy looked very lively, having unusually large dark eyes, though no
more than the usual indication of a future nose.

"This is my baby," said Tessa, seating herself close to Baldassarre.
"You didn't think it was so pretty, did you?  It is like the little
Gesu, and I should think the Santa Madonna would be kinder to me now, is
it not true?  But I have not much to ask for, because I have everything
now--only that I should see my husband oftener.  You may hold the
bambino a little if you like, but I think you must not kiss him, because
you might hurt him."

She spoke this prohibition in a tone of soothing excuse, and Baldassarre
could not refuse to hold the small package.  "Poor thing! poor thing!"
he said, in a deep voice which had something strangely threatening in
its apparent pity.  It did not seem to him as if this guileless loving
little woman could reconcile him to the world at all, but rather that
she was with him against the world, that she was a creature who would
need to be avenged.

"Oh, don't you be sorry for me," she said; "for though I don't see him
often, he is more beautiful and good than anybody else in the world.  I
say prayers to him when he's away.  You couldn't think what he is!"

She looked at Baldassarre with a wide glance of mysterious meaning,
taking the baby from him again, and almost wishing he would question her
as if he wanted very much to know more.

"Yes, I could," said Baldassarre, rather bitterly.

"No, I'm sure you never could," said Tessa, earnestly.  "You thought he
might be Nofri," she added, with a triumphant air of conclusiveness.
"But never mind; you couldn't know.  What is your name?"

He rubbed his hand over his knitted brow, then looked at her blankly and
said, "Ah, child, what is it?"

It was not that he did not often remember his name well enough; and if
he had had presence of mind now to remember it, he would have chosen not
to tell it.  But a sudden question appealing to his memory, had a
paralysing effect, and in that moment he was conscious of nothing but
helplessness.

Ignorant as Tessa was, the pity stirred in her by his blank look taught
her to say--

"_Never_ mind: you are a stranger, it is no matter about your having a
name.  Good-bye now, because I want my breakfast.  You will come here
and rest when you like; Monna Lisa says you may.  And don't you be
unhappy, for we'll be good to you."

"Poor thing!" said Baldassarre again.



CHAPTER THIRTY FOUR.

NO PLACE FOR REPENTANCE.

Messer Naldo came again sooner than was expected: he came on the evening
of the twenty-eighth of November, only eleven days after his previous
visit, proving that he had not gone far beyond the mountains; and a
scene which we have witnessed as it took place that evening in the Via
de' Bardi may help to explain the impulse which turned his steps towards
the hill of San Giorgio.

When Tito had first found this home for Tessa, on his return from Rome,
more than a year and a half ago, he had acted, he persuaded himself,
simply under the constraint imposed on him by his own kindliness after
the unlucky incident which had made foolish little Tessa imagine him to
be her husband.  It was true that the kindness was manifested towards a
pretty trusting thing whom it was impossible to be near without feeling
inclined to caress and pet her; but it was not less true that Tito had
movements of kindness towards her apart from any contemplated gain to
himself.  Otherwise, charming as her prettiness and prattle were in a
lazy moment, he might have preferred to be free from her; for he was not
in love with Tessa--he was in love for the first time in his life with
an entirely different woman, whom he was not simply inclined to shower
caresses on, but whose presence possessed him so that the simple sweep
of her long tresses across his cheek seemed to vibrato through the
hours.  All the young ideal passion he had in him had been stirred by
Romola, and his fibre was too fine, his intellect too bright, for him to
be tempted into the habits of a gross pleasure-seeker.  But he had spun
a web about himself and Tessa, which he felt incapable of breaking: in
the first moments after the mimic marriage he had been prompted to leave
her under an illusion by a distinct calculation of his own possible
need, but since that critical moment it seemed to him that the web had
gone on spinning itself in spite of him, like a growth over which he had
no power.  The elements of kindness and self-indulgence are hard to
distinguish in a soft nature like Tito's; and the annoyance he had felt
under Tessa's pursuit of him on the day of his betrothal, the thorough
intention of revealing the truth to her with which he set out to fulfil
his promise of seeing her again, were a sufficiently strong argument to
him that in ultimately leaving Tessa under her illusion and providing a
home for her, he had been overcome by his own kindness.  And in these
days of his first devotion to Romola he needed a self-justifying
argument.  He had learned to be glad that she was deceived about some
things.  But every strong feeling makes to itself a conscience of its
own--has its own piety; just as much as the feeling of the son towards
the mother, which will sometimes survive amid the worst fumes of
depravation; and Tito could not yet be easy in committing a secret
offence against his wedded love.

But he was all the more careful in taking precautions to preserve the
secrecy of the offence.  Monna Lisa, who, like many of her class, never
left her habitation except to go to one or two particular shops, and to
confession once a year, knew nothing of his real name and whereabout:
she only know that he paid her so as to make her very comfortable, and
minded little about the rest, save that she got fond of Tessa, and found
pleasure in the cares for which she was paid.  There was some mystery
behind, clearly, since Tessa was a contadina, and Messer Naldo was a
signor; but, for aught Monna Lisa knew, he might be a real husband.  For
Tito had thoroughly frightened Tessa into silence about the
circumstances of their marriage, by telling her that if she broke that
silence she would never see him again; and Monna Lisa's deafness, which
made it impossible to say anything to her without some premeditation,
had saved Tessa from any incautious revelation to her, such as had run
off her tongue in talking with Baldassarre.  For a long while Tito's
visits were so rare, that it seemed likely enough he took journeys
between them.  They were prompted chiefly by the desire to see that all
things were going on well with Tessa; and though he always found his
visit pleasanter than the prospect of it--always felt anew the charm of
that pretty ignorant lovingness and trust--he had not yet any real need
of it.  But he was determined, if possible, to preserve the simplicity
on which the charm depended; to keep Tessa a genuine contadina, and not
place the small field-flower among conditions that would rob it of its
grace.  He would have been shocked to see her in the dress of any other
rank than her own; the piquancy of her talk would be all gone, if things
began to have new relations for her, if her world became wider, her
pleasures less childish; and the squirrel-like enjoyment of nuts at
discretion marked the standard of the luxuries he had provided for her.
By this means, Tito saved Tessa's charm from being sullied; and he also,
by a convenient coincidence, saved himself from aggravating expenses
that were already rather importunate to a man whose money was all
required for his avowed habits of life.

This, in brief, had been the history of Tito's relation to Tessa up to a
very recent date.  It is true that once or twice before Bardo's death,
the sense that there was Tessa up the hill, with whom it was possible to
pass an hour agreeably, had been an inducement to him to escape from a
little weariness of the old man, when, for lack of any positive
engagement, he might otherwise have borne the weariness patiently and
shared Romola's burden.  But the moment when he had first felt a real
hunger for Tessa's ignorant lovingness and belief in _him_ had not come
till quite lately, and it was distinctly marked out by circumstances as
little to be forgotten as the oncoming of a malady that has permanently
vitiated the sight and hearing.  It was the day when he had first seen
Baldassarre, and had bought the armour.  Returning across the bridge
that night, with the coat of mail in his hands, he had felt an
unconquerable shrinking from an immediate encounter with Romola.  She,
too, knew little of the actual world; she, too, trusted him; but he had
an uneasy consciousness that behind her frank eyes there was a nature
that could judge him, and that any ill-founded trust of hers sprang not
from pretty brute-like incapacity, but from a nobleness which might
prove an alarming touchstone.  He wanted a little ease, a little repose
from self-control, after the agitation and exertions of the day; he
wanted to be where he could adjust his mind to the morrow, without
caring how he behaved at the present moment.  And there was a sweet
adoring creature within reach whose presence was as safe and
unconstraining as that of her own kids,--who would believe any fable,
and remain quite unimpressed by public opinion.  And so on that evening,
when Romola was waiting and listening for him, he turned his steps up
the hill.

No wonder, then, that the steps took the same course on this evening,
eleven days later, when he had had to recoil under Romola's first
outburst of scorn.  He could not wish Tessa in his wife's place, or
refrain from wishing that his wife should be thoroughly reconciled to
him; for it was Romola, and not Tessa, that belonged to the world where
all the larger desires of a man who had ambition and effective faculties
must necessarily lie.  But he wanted a refuge from a standard
disagreeably rigorous, of which he could not make himself independent
simply by thinking it folly; and Tessa's little soul was that inviting
refuge.

It was not much more than eight o'clock when he went up the stone steps
to the door of Tessa's room.  Usually she heard his entrance into the
house, and ran to meet him, but not to-night; and when he opened the
door he saw the reason.  A single dim light was burning above the dying
fire, and showed Tessa in a kneeling attitude by the head of the bed
where the baby lay.  Her head had fallen aside on the pillow, and her
brown rosary, which usually hung above the pillow over the picture of
the Madonna and the golden palm-branches, lay in the loose grasp of her
right-hand.  She had gone fast asleep over her beads.  Tito stepped
lightly across the little room, and sat down close to her.  She had
probably heard the opening of the door as part of her dream, for he had
not been looking at her two moments before she opened her eyes.  She
opened them without any start, and remained quite motionless looking at
him, as if the sense that he was there smiling at her shut out any
impulse which could disturb that happy passiveness.  But when he put his
hand under her chin, and stooped to kiss her, she said--

"I dreamed it, and then I said it was dreaming--and then I awoke, and it
was true."

"Little sinner!" said Tito, pinching her chin, "you have not said half
your prayers.  I will punish you by not looking at your baby; it is
ugly."

Tessa did not like those words, even though Tito was smiling.  She had
some pouting distress in her face, as she said, bending anxiously over
the baby--

"Ah, it is not true!  He is prettier than anything.  You do not think he
is ugly.  You will look at him.  He is even prettier than when you saw
him before--only he's asleep, and you can't see his eyes or his tongue,
and I can't show you his hair--and it grows--isn't that wonderful?  Look
at him!  It's true his face is very much all alike when he's asleep,
there is not so much to see as when he's awake.  If you kiss him very
gently, he won't wake: you want to kiss him, is it not true?"

He satisfied her by giving the small mummy a butterfly kiss, and then
putting his hand on her shoulder and turning her face towards him, said,
"You like looking at the baby better than looking at your husband, you
false one!"

She was still kneeling, and now rested her hands on his knee, looking up
at him like one of Fra Lippo Lippi's round-cheeked adoring angels.

"No," she said, shaking her head; "I love you always best, only I want
you to look at the bambino and love him; I used only to want you to love
me."

"And did you expect me to come again so soon?" said Tito, inclined to
make her prattle.  He still felt the effects of the agitation he had
undergone--still felt like a man who has been violently jarred; and this
was the easiest relief from silence and solitude.

"Ah, no," said Tessa, "I have counted the days--to-day I began at my
right thumb again--since you put on the beautiful chain-coat, that
Messer San Michele gave you to take care of you on your journey.  And
you have got it on now," she said, peeping through the opening in the
breast of his tunic.  "Perhaps it made you come back sooner."

"Perhaps it did, Tessa," he said.  "But don't mind the coat now.  Tell
me what has happened since I was here.  Did you see the tents in the
Prato, and the soldiers and horsemen when they passed the bridges--did
you hear the drums and trumpets?"

"Yes, and I was rather frightened, because I thought the soldiers might
come up here.  And Monna Lisa was a little afraid too, for she said they
might carry our kids off; she said it was their business to do mischief.
But the Holy Madonna took care of us, for we never saw one of them up
here.  But something has happened, only I hardly dare tell you, and that
is what I was saying more Aves for."

"What do you mean, Tessa?" said Tito, rather anxiously.  "Make haste and
tell me."

"Yes, but will you let me sit on your knee? because then I think I shall
not be so frightened."

He took her on his knee, and put his arm round her, but looked grave: it
seemed that something unpleasant must pursue him even here.

"At first I didn't mean to tell you," said Tessa, speaking almost in a
whisper, as if that would mitigate the offence; "because we thought the
old man would be gone away before you came again, and it would be as if
it had not been.  But now he is there, and you are come, and I never did
anything you told me not to do before.  And I want to tell you, and then
you will perhaps forgive me, for it is a long while before I go to
confession."

"Yes, tell me everything, my Tessa."  He began to hope it was after all
a trivial matter.

"Oh, you will be sorry for him: I'm afraid he cries about something when
I don't see him.  But that was not the reason I went to him first; it
was because I wanted to talk to him and show him my baby, and he was a
stranger that lived nowhere, and I thought you wouldn't care so much
about my talking to him.  And I think he is not a bad old man, and he
wanted to come and sleep on the straw next to the goats, and I made
Monna Lisa say, `Yes, he might,' and he's away all the day almost, but
when he comes back I talk to him, and take him something to eat."

"Some beggar, I suppose.  It was naughty of you, Tessa, and I am angry
with Monna Lisa.  I must have him sent away."

"No, I think he is not a beggar, for he wanted to pay Monna Lisa, only
she asked him to do work for her instead.  And he gets himself shaved,
and his clothes are tidy: Monna Lisa says he is a decent man.  But
sometimes I think he is not in his right mind: Lupo, at Peretola, was
not in his right mind, and he looks a little like Lupo sometimes, as if
he didn't know where he was."

"What sort of face has he?" said Tito, his heart beginning to beat
strangely.  He was so haunted by the thought of Baldassarre, that it was
already he whom he saw in imagination sitting on the straw not many
yards from him.  "Fetch your stool, my Tessa, and sit on it."

"Shall you not forgive me?" she said, timidly, moving from his knee.

"Yes, I will not be angry--only sit down, and tell me what sort of old
man this is."

"I can't think how to tell you: he is not like my stepfather Nofri, or
anybody.  His face is yellow, and he has deep marks in it; and his hair
is white, but there is none on the top of his head: and his eyebrows are
black, and he looks from under them at me, and says, `Poor thing!' to
me, as if he thought I was beaten as I used to be; and that seems as if
he couldn't be in his right mind, doesn't it?  And I asked him his name
once, but he couldn't tell it me: yet everybody has a name--is it not
true?  And he has a book now, and keeps looking at it ever so long, as
if he were a Padre.  But I think he is not saying prayers, for his lips
never move;--ah, you are angry with me, or is it because you are sorry
for the old man?"

Tito's eyes were still fixed on Tessa; but he had ceased to see her, and
was only seeing the objects her words suggested.  It was this absent
glance which frightened her, and she could not help going to kneel at
his side again.  But he did not heed her, and she dared not touch him,
or speak to him: she knelt, trembling and wondering; and this state of
mind suggesting her beads to her, she took them from the floor, and
began to tell them again, her pretty lips moving silently, and her blue
eyes wide with anxiety and struggling tears.

Tito was quite unconscious of her movements--unconscious of his own
attitude: he was in that wrapt state in which a man will grasp painful
roughness, and press and press it closer, and never feel it.  A new
possibility had risen before him, which might dissolve at once the
wretched conditions of fear and suppression that were marring his life.
Destiny had brought within his reach an opportunity of retrieving that
moment on the steps of the Duomo, when the Past had grasped him with
living quivering hands, and he had disowned it.  A few steps, and he
might be face to face with his father, with no witness by; he might seek
forgiveness and reconciliation; and there was money now, from the sale
of the library, to enable them to leave Florence without disclosure, and
go into Southern Italy, where under the probable French rule, he had
already laid a foundation for patronage.  Romola need never know the
whole truth, for she could have no certain means of identifying that
prisoner in the Duomo with Baldassarre, or of learning what had taken
place on the steps, except from Baldassarre himself; and if his father
forgave, he would also consent to bury, that offence.

But with this possibility of relief, by an easy spring, from present
evil, there rose the other possibility, that the fierce-hearted man
might refuse to be propitiated.  Well--and if he did, things would only
be as they had been before; for there would be _no witness by_.  It was
not repentance with a white sheet round it and taper in hand, confessing
its hated sin in the eyes of men, that Tito was preparing for: it was a
repentance that would make all things pleasant again, and keep all past
unpleasant things secret.  And Tito's soft-heartedness, his
indisposition to feel himself in harsh relations with any creature, was
in strong activity towards his father, now his father was brought near
to him.  It would be a state of ease that his nature could not but
desire, if the poisonous hatred in Baldassarre's glance could be
replaced by something of the old affection and complacency.

Tito longed to have his world once again completely cushioned with
goodwill, and longed for it the more eagerly because of what he had just
suffered from the collision with Romola.  It was not difficult to him to
smile pleadingly on those whom he had injured, and offer to do them much
kindness: and no quickness of intellect could tell him exactly the taste
of that honey on the lips of the injured.  The opportunity was there,
and it raised an inclination which hemmed in the calculating activity of
his thought.  He started up, and stepped towards the door; but Tessa's
cry, as she dropped her beads, roused him from his absorption.  He
turned and said--

"My Tessa, get me a lantern; and don't cry, little pigeon, I am not
angry."

They went down the stairs, and Tessa was going to shout the need of the
lantern in Monna Lisa's ear, when Tito, who had opened the door, said,
"Stay, Tessa--no, I want no lantern: go upstairs again, and keep quiet,
and say nothing to Monna Lisa."

In half a minute he stood before the closed door of the outhouse, where
the moon was shining white on the old paintless wood.

In this last decisive moment, Tito felt a tremor upon him--a sudden
instinctive shrinking from a possible tiger-glance, a possible
tiger-leap.  Yet why should he, a young man, be afraid of an old one? a
young man with armour on, of an old man without a weapon?  It was but a
moment's hesitation, and Tito laid his hand on the door.  Was his father
asleep?  Was there nothing else but the door that screened him from the
voice and the glance which no magic could turn into ease?

Baldassarre was not asleep.  There was a square opening high in the wall
of the hovel, through which the moonbeams sent in a stream of pale
light; and if Tito could have looked through the opening, he would have
seen his father seated on the straw, with something that shone like a
white star in his hand.  Baldassarre was feeling the edge of his
poniard, taking refuge in that sensation from a hopeless blank of
thought that seemed to lie like a great gulf between his passion and its
aim.

He was in one of his most wretched moments of conscious helplessness: he
had been poring, while it was light, over the book that lay open beside
him; then he had been trying to recall the names of his jewels, and the
symbols engraved on them; and though at certain other times he had
recovered some of those names and symbols, to-night they were all gone
into darkness.  And this effort at inward seeing had seemed to end in
utter paralysis of memory.  He was reduced to a sort of mad
consciousness that he was a solitary pulse of just rage in a world
filled with defiant baseness.  He had clutched and unsheathed his
dagger, and for a long while had been feeling its edge, his mind
narrowed to one image, and the dream of one sensation--the sensation of
plunging that dagger into a base heart, which he was unable to pierce in
any other way.

Tito had his hand on the door and was pulling it: it dragged against the
ground as such old doors often do, and Baldassarre, startled out of his
dreamlike state, rose from his sitting posture in vague amazement, not
knowing where he was.  He had not yet risen to his feet, and was still
kneeling on one knee, when the door came wide open and he saw, dark
against the moonlight, with the rays falling on one bright mass of curls
and one rounded olive cheek, the image of his reverie--not shadowy--
close and real like water at the lips after the thirsty dream of it.  No
thought could come athwart that eager thirst.  In one moment, before
Tito could start back, the old man, with the preternatural force of rage
in his limbs, had sprung forward, and the dagger had flashed out.  In
the next moment the dagger had snapped in two, and Baldassarre, under
the parrying force of Tito's arm, had fallen back on the straw,
clutching the hilt with its bit of broken blade.  The pointed end lay
shining against Tito's feet.

Tito had felt one great heart-leap of terror as he had staggered under
the weight of the thrust: he felt now the triumph of deliverance and
safety.  His armour had been proved, and vengeance lay helpless before
him.  But the triumph raised no devilish impulse; on the contrary, the
sight of his father close to him and unable to injure him, made the
effort at reconciliation easier.  He was free from fear, but he had only
the more unmixed and direct want to be free from the sense that he was
hated.  After they had looked at each other a little while, Baldassarre
lying motionless in despairing rage, Tito said in his soft tones, just
as they had sounded before the last parting on the shores of Greece--

"_Padre mio_!"  There was a pause after those words, but no movement or
sound till he said--

"I came to ask your forgiveness!"

Again he paused, that the healing balm of those words might have time to
work.  But there was no sign of change in Baldassarre: he lay as he had
fallen, leaning on one arm: he was trembling, but it was from the shock
that had thrown him down.

"I was taken by surprise that morning.  I wish now to be a son to you
again.  I wish to make the rest of your life happy, that you may forget
what you have suffered."

He paused again.  He had used the clearest and strongest words he could
think of.  It was useless to say more, until he had some sign that
Baldassarre understood him.  Perhaps his mind was too distempered or too
imbecile even for that: perhaps the shock of his fall and his
disappointed rage might have quite suspended the use of his faculties.

Presently Baldassarre began to move.  He threw away the broken dagger,
and slowly and gradually, still trembling, began to raise himself from
the ground.  Tito put out his hand to help him, and so strangely quick
are men's souls that in this moment, when he began to feel his atonement
was accepted, he had a darting thought of the irksome efforts it
entailed.  Baldassarre clutched the hand that was held out, raised
himself and clutched it still, going close up to Tito till their faces
were not a foot off each other.  Then he began to speak, in a deep
trembling voice--

"I saved you--I nurtured you--I loved you.  You forsook me--you robbed
me--you denied me.  What can you give me?  You have made the world
bitterness to me; but there is one draught of sweetness left--_that you
shall know agony_."

He let fall Tito's hand, and going backwards a little, first rested his
arm on a projecting stone in the wall, and then sank again in a sitting
posture on the straw.  The outleap of fury in the dagger-thrust had
evidently exhausted him.

Tito stood silent.  If it had been a deep yearning-emotion which had
brought him to ask his father's forgiveness, the denial of it might have
caused him a pang which would have excluded the rushing train of thought
that followed those decisive words.  As it was, though the sentence of
unchangeable hatred grated on him and jarred him terribly, his mind
glanced round with a self-preserving instinct to see how far those words
could have the force of a substantial threat.  When he had come down to
speak to Baldassarre, he had said to himself that if his effort at
reconciliation failed, things would only be as they had been before.
The first glance of his mind was backward to that thought again, but the
future possibilities of danger that were conjured up along with it
brought the perception that things were _not_ as they had been before,
and the perception came as a triumphant relief.  There was not only the
broken dagger, there was the certainty, from what Tessa had told him,
that Baldassarre's mind was broken too, and had no edge that could reach
him.  Tito felt he had no choice now: he must defy Baldassarre as a mad,
imbecile old man; and the chances were so strongly on his side that
there was hardly room for fear.  No; except the fear of having to do
many unpleasant things in order to save himself from what was yet more
unpleasant.  And one of those unpleasant things must be done
immediately: it was very difficult.

"Do you mean to stay here?" he said.

"No," said Baldassarre, bitterly, "you mean to turn me out."

"Not so," said Tito; "I only ask."

"I tell you, you have turned me out.  If it is your straw, you turned me
off it three years ago."

"Then you mean to leave this place?" said Tito, more anxious about this
certainty than the ground of it.

"I have spoken," said Baldassarre.

Tito turned and re-entered the house.  Monna Lisa was nodding; he went
up to Tessa, and found her crying by the side of her baby.

"Tessa," he said, sitting down and taking her head between his hands;
"leave off crying, little goose, and listen to me."

He lifted her chin upward, that she might look at him, while he spoke
very distinctly and emphatically.

"You must never speak to that old man again.  He is a mad old man, and
he wants to kill me.  Never speak to him or listen to him again."

Tessa's tears had ceased, and her lips were pale with fright.

"Is he gone away?" she whispered.

"He will go away.  Remember what I have said to you."

"Yes; I will never speak to a stranger any more," said Tessa, with a
sense of guilt.

He told her, to comfort her, that he would come again to-morrow; and
then went down to Monna Lisa to rebuke her severely for letting a
dangerous man come about the house.

Tito felt that these were odious tasks; they were very evil-tasted
morsels, but they were forced upon him.  He heard Monna Lisa fasten the
door behind him, and turned away, without looking towards the open door
of the hovel.  He felt secure that Baldassarre would go, and he could
not wait to see him go.  Even _his_ young frame and elastic spirit were
shattered by the agitations that had been crowded into this single
evening.

Baldassarre was still sitting on the straw when the shadow of Tito
passed by.  Before him lay the fragments of the broken dagger; beside
him lay the open book, over which he had pored in vain.  They looked
like mocking symbols of his utter helplessness; and his body was still
too trembling for him to rise and walk away.

But the next morning, very early, when Tessa peeped anxiously through
the hole in her shutter, the door of the hovel was open, and the strange
old man was gone.



CHAPTER THIRTY FIVE.

WHAT FLORENCE WAS THINKING OF.

For several days Tito saw little of Romola.  He told her gently, the
next morning, that it would be better for her to remove any small
articles of her own from the library, as there would be agents coming to
pack up the antiquities.  Then, leaning to kiss her on the brow, he
suggested that she should keep in her own room where the little painted
tabernacle was, and where she was then sitting, so that she might be
away from the noise of strange footsteps, Romola assented quietly,
making no sign of emotion: the night had been one long waking to her,
and, in spite of her healthy frame, sensation had become a dull
continuous pain, as if she had been stunned and bruised.  Tito divined
that she felt ill, but he dared say no more; he only dared, perceiving
that her hand and brow were stone cold, to fetch a furred mantle and
throw it lightly round her.  And in every brief interval that he
returned to her, the scene was nearly the same: he tried to propitiate
her by some unobtrusive act or word of tenderness, and she seemed to
have lost the power of speaking to him, or of looking at him.
"Patience!" he said to himself.  "She will recover it, and forgive at
last.  The tie to me must still remain the strongest."  When the
stricken person is slow to recover and look as if nothing had happened,
the striker easily glides into the position of the aggrieved party; he
feels no bruise himself, and is strongly conscious of his own amiable
behaviour since he inflicted the blow.  But Tito was not naturally
disposed to feel himself aggrieved; the constant bent of his mind was
towards propitiation, and he would have submitted to much for the sake
of feeling Romola's hand resting on his head again, as it did that
morning when he first shrank from looking at her.

But he found it the less difficult to wait patiently for the return of
his home happiness, because his life out of doors was more and more
interesting to him.  A course of action which is in strictness a
slowly-prepared outgrowth of the entire character, is yet almost always
traceable to a single impression as its point of apparent origin; and
since that moment in the Piazza del Duomo, when Tito, mounted on the
bales, had tasted a keen pleasure in the consciousness of his ability to
tickle the ears of men with any phrases that pleased them, his
imagination had glanced continually towards a sort of political activity
which the troubled public life of Florence was likely enough to find
occasion for.  But the fresh dread of Baldassarre, waked in the same
moment, had lain like an immovable rocky obstruction across that path,
and had urged him into the sale of the library, as a preparation for the
possible necessity of leaving Florence, at the very time when he was
beginning to feel that it had a new attraction for him.  That dread was
nearly removed _now_: he must wear his armour still, he must prepare
himself for possible demands on his coolness and ingenuity, but he did
not feel obliged to take the inconvenient step of leaving Florence and
seeking new fortunes.  His father had refused the offered atonement--had
forced him into defiance; and an old man in a strange place, with his
memory gone, was weak enough to be defied.

Tito's implicit desires were working themselves out now in very explicit
thoughts.  As the freshness of young passion faded, life was taking more
and more decidedly for him the aspect of a game in which there was an
agreeable mingling of skill and chance.

And the game that might be played in Florence promised to be rapid and
exciting; it was a game of revolutionary and party struggle, sure to
include plenty of that unavowed action in which brilliant ingenuity,
able to get rid of all inconvenient beliefs except that "ginger is hot
in the mouth," is apt to see the path of superior wisdom.

No sooner were the French guests gone than Florence was as agitated as a
colony of ants when an alarming shadow has been removed, and the camp
has to be repaired.  "How are we to raise the money for the French king?
How are we to manage the war with those obstinate Pisan rebels?  Above
all, how are we to mend our plan of government, so as to hit on the best
way of getting our magistrates chosen and our laws voted?"  Till those
questions were well answered trade was in danger of standing still, and
that large body of the working men who were not counted as citizens and
had not so much as a vote to serve as an anodyne to their stomachs were
likely to get impatient.  Something must be done.

And first the great bell was sounded, to call the citizens to a
parliament in the Piazza de' Signori; and when the crowd was wedged
close, and hemmed in by armed men at all the outlets, the Signoria (or
Gonfaloniere and eight Priors for the time being) came out and stood by
the stone lion on the platform in front of the Old Palace, and proposed
that twenty chief men of the city should have dictatorial authority
given them, by force of which they should for one year choose all
magistrates, and set the frame of government in order.  And the people
shouted their assent, and felt themselves the electors of the Twenty.
This kind of "parliament" was a very old Florentine fashion, by which
the will of the few was made to seem the choice of the many.

The shouting in the Piazza was soon at an end, but not so the debating
inside the palace: was Florence to have a Great Council after the
Venetian mode, where all the officers of government might be elected,
and all laws voted by a wide number of citizens of a certain age and of
ascertained qualifications, without question of rank or party? or, was
it to be governed on a narrower and less popular scheme, in which the
hereditary influence of good families would be less adulterated with the
votes of shopkeepers.  Doctors of law disputed day after day, and far on
into the night.  Messer Pagolantonio Soderini alleged excellent reasons
on the side of the popular scheme; Messer Guidantonio Vespucci alleged
reasons equally excellent on the side, of a more aristocratic form.  It
was a question of boiled or roast, which had been prejudged by the
palates of the disputants, and the excellent arguing might have been
protracted a long while without any other result than that of deferring
the cooking.  The majority of the men inside the _palace_, having power
already in their hands, agreed with Vespucci, and thought change should
be moderate; the majority outside the palace, conscious of little power
and many grievances, were less afraid of change.

And there was a force outside the palace which was gradually tending to
give the vague desires of that majority the character of a determinate
will.  That force was the preaching of Savonarola.  Impelled partly by
the spiritual necessity that was laid upon him to guide the people, and
partly by the prompting of public-men who could get no measures carried
without his aid, he was rapidly passing in his daily sermons from the
general to the special--from telling his hearers that they must postpone
their private passions and interests to the public good, to telling them
precisely what sort of government they must have in order to promote
that good--from "Choose whatever is best for all" to "Choose the Great
Council," and "the Great Council is the will of God."

To Savonarola these were as good as identical propositions.  The Great
Council was the only practicable plan for giving an expression to the
public will large enough to counteract the vitiating influence of party
interests: it was a plan that would make honest impartial public action
at least possible.  And the purer the government of Florence would
become--the more secure from the designs of men who saw their own
advantage in the moral debasement of their fellows--the nearer would the
Florentine people approach the character of a pure community, worthy to
lead the way in the renovation of the Church and the world.  And Fra
Girolamo's mind never stopped short of that sublimest end: the objects
towards which he felt himself working had always the same moral
magnificence.  He had no private malice--he sought no petty
gratification.  Even in the last terrible days, when ignominy, torture,
and the fear of torture, had laid bare every hidden weakness of his
soul, he could say to his importunate judges: "Do not wonder if it seems
to you that I have told but few things; for my purposes were few and
great."  [Note 1.]

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Note 1.  "Se vi pare che io abbia detto poche cose, non ve ne
maravigliate, perche le mie cose erano poche e grandi."



CHAPTER THIRTY SIX.

ARIADNE DISCROWNS HERSELF.

It was more than three weeks before the contents of the library were all
packed and carried away.  And Romola, instead of shutting her eyes and
ears, had watched the process.  The exhaustion consequent on violent
emotion is apt to bring a dreamy disbelief in the reality of its cause;
and in the evening, when the workmen were gone, Romola took her
hand-lamp and walked slowly round amongst the confusion of straw and
wooden cases, pausing at every vacant pedestal, every well-known object
laid prostrate, with a sort of bitter desire to assure herself that
there was a sufficient reason why her love was gone and the world was
barren for her.  And still, as the evenings came, she went and went
again; no longer to assure herself, but because this vivifying of pain
and despair about her father's memory was the strongest life left to her
affections.  On the 23rd of December, she knew that the last packages
were going.  She ran to the loggia at the top of the house that she
might not lose the last pang of seeing the slow wheels move across the
bridge.

It was a cloudy day, and nearing dusk.  Arno ran dark and shivering; the
hills were mournful; and Florence with its girdling stone towers had
that silent, tomb-like look, which unbroken shadow gives to a city seen
from above.  Santa Croce, where her father lay, was dark amidst that
darkness, and slowly crawling over the bridge, and slowly vanishing up
the narrow street, was the white load, like a cruel, deliberate Fate
carrying away her father's lifelong hope to bury it in an unmarked
grave.  Romola felt less that she was seeing this herself than that her
father was conscious of it as he lay helpless under the imprisoning
stones, where her hand could not reach his to tell him that he was not
alone.

She stood still even after the load had disappeared, heedless of the
cold, and soothed by the gloom which seemed to cover her like a mourning
garment and shut out the discord of joy.  When suddenly the great bell
in the palace-tower rang out a mighty peal: not the hammer-sound of
alarm, but an agitated peal of triumph; and one after another every
other bell in every other tower seemed to catch the vibration and join
the chorus.  And, as the chorus swelled and swelled till the air seemed
made of sound--little flames, vibrating too, as if the sound had caught
fire, burst out between the turrets of the palace and on the girdling
towers.

That sudden clang, that leaping light, fell on Romola like sharp wounds.
They were the triumph of demons at the success of her husband's
treachery, and the desolation of her life.  Little more than three weeks
ago she had been intoxicated with the sound of those very bells; and in
the gladness of Florence, she had heard a prophecy of her own gladness.
But now the general joy seemed cruel to her: she stood aloof from that
common life--that Florence which was flinging out its loud exultation to
stun the ears of sorrow and loneliness.  She could never join hands with
gladness again, but only with those whom it was in the hard nature of
gladness to forget.  And in her bitterness she felt that all rejoicing
was mockery.  Men shouted pagans with their souls full of heaviness, and
then looked in their neighbours' faces to see if there was really such a
thing as joy.  Romola had lost her belief in the happiness she had once
thirsted for: it was a hateful, smiling, soft-handed thing, with a
narrow, selfish heart.

She ran down from the loggia, with her hands pressed against her ears,
and was hurrying across the antechamber, when she was startled by
unexpectedly meeting her husband, who was coming to seek her.

His step was elastic, and there was a radiance of satisfaction about him
not quite usual.

"What! the noise was a little too much for you?" he said; for Romola, as
she started at the sight of him, had pressed her hands all the closer
against her ears.  He took her gently by the wrist, and drew her arm
within his, leading her into the saloon surrounded with the dancing
nymphs and fauns, and then went on speaking: "Florence is gone quite mad
at getting its Great Council, which is to put an end to all the evils
under the sun; especially to the vice of merriment.  You may well look
stunned, my Romola, and you are cold.  You must not stay so late under
that windy loggia without wrappings.  I was coming to tell you that I am
suddenly called to Rome about some learned business for Bernardo
Rucellai.  I am going away immediately, for I am to join my party at San
Gaggio to-night, that we may start early in the morning.  I need give
you no trouble; I have had my packages made already.  It will not be
very long before I am back again."

He knew he had nothing to expect from her but quiet endurance of what he
said and did.  He could not even venture to kiss her brow this evening,
but just pressed her hand to his lips, and left her.  Tito felt that
Romola was a more unforgiving woman than he had imagined; her love was
not that sweet clinging instinct, stronger than all judgments, which, he
began to see now, made the great charm of a wife.  Still, this petrified
coldness was better than a passionate, futile opposition.  Her pride and
capability of seeing where resistance was useless had the inconvenience.

But when the door had closed on Tito, Romola lost the look of cold
immobility winch came over her like an inevitable frost whenever he
approached her.  Inwardly she was very far from being in a state of
quiet endurance, and the days that had passed since the scene which had
divided her from Tito had been days of active planning and preparation
for the fulfilment of a purpose.

The first thing she did now was to call old Maso to her.

"Maso," she said, in a decided tone, "we take our journey to-morrow
morning.  We shall be able now to overtake that first convoy of cloth,
while they are waiting at San Piero.  See about the two mules to-night,
and be ready to set off with them at break of day, and wait for me at
Trespiano."

She meant to take Maso with her as far as Bologna, and then send him
back with letters to her godfather and Tito, telling them that she was
gone and never meant to return.  She had planned her departure so that
its secrecy might be perfect, and her broken love and life be hidden
away unscanned by vulgar eyes.  Bernardo del Nero had been absent at his
villa, willing to escape from political suspicions to his favourite
occupation of attending to his land, and she had paid him the debt
without a personal interview.  He did not even know that the library was
sold, and was left to conjecture that some sudden piece of good fortune
had enabled Tito to raise this sum of money.  Maso had been taken into
her confidence only so far that he knew her intended journey was a
secret; and to do just what she told him was the thing he cared most for
in his withered wintry age.

Romola did not mean to go to bed that night.  When she had fastened the
door she took her taper to the carved and painted chest which contained
her wedding-clothes.  The white silk and gold lay there, the long white
veil and the circlet of pearls.  A great sob rose as she looked at them:
they seemed the shroud of her dead happiness.  In a tiny gold loop of
the circlet a sugar-plum had lodged--a pink hailstone from the shower of
sweets: Tito had detected it first, and had said that it should always
remain there.  At certain moments--and this was one of them--Romola was
carried, by a sudden wave of memory, back again into the time of perfect
trust, and felt again the presence of the husband whose love made the
world as fresh and wonderful to her as to a little child that sits in
stillness among the sunny flowers: heard the gentle tones and saw the
soft eyes without any lie in them, and breathed again that large freedom
of the soul which comes from the faith that the being who is nearest to
us is greater than ourselves.  And in those brief moments the tears
always rose: the woman's lovingness felt something akin to what the
bereaved mother feels when the tiny fingers seem to lie warm on her
bosom, and yet are marble to her lips as she bends over the silent bed.

But there was something else lying in the chest besides the
wedding-clothes: it was something dark and coarse, rolled up in a close
bundle.  She turned away her eyes from the white and gold to the dark
bundle, and as her hands touched the serge, her tears began to be
checked.  That coarse roughness recalled her fully to the present, from
which love and delight were gone.  She unfastened the thick white cord
and spread the bundle out on the table.  It was the grey serge dress of
a sister belonging to the third order of Saint Francis, living in the
world but especially devoted to deeds of piety--a personage whom the
Florentines were accustomed to call a Pinzochera.  Romola was going to
put on this dress as a disguise, and she determined to put it on at
once, so that, if she needed sleep before the morning, she might wake up
in perfect readiness to be gone.  She put off her black garment, and as
she thrust her soft white arms into the harsh sleeves of the serge
mantle and felt the hard girdle of rope hurt her fingers as she tied it,
she courted those rude sensations: they were in keeping with her new
scorn of that thing called pleasure which made men base--that dexterous
contrivance for selfish ease, that shrinking from endurance and strain,
when others were bowing beneath burdens too heavy for them, which now
made one image with her husband.  Then she gathered her long hair
together, drew it away tight from her face, bound it in a great hard
knot at the back of her head, and taking a square piece of black silk,
tied it in the fashion of a kerchief close across her head and under her
chin; and over that she drew the cowl.  She lifted the candle to the
mirror.  Surely her disguise would be complete to any one who had not
lived very near to her.  To herself she looked strangely like her
brother Dino: the full oval of the cheek had only to be wasted; the
eyes, already sad, had only to become a little sunken.  Was she getting
more like him in anything else?  Only in this, that she understood now
how men could be prompted to rush away for ever from earthly delights,
how they could be prompted to dwell on images of sorrow rather than of
beauty and joy.

But she did not linger at the mirror: she set about collecting and
packing all the relics of her father and mother that were too large to
be carried in her small travelling-wallet.  They were all to be put in
the chest along with her wedding-clothes, and the chest was to be
committed to her godfather when she was safely gone.  First she laid in
the portraits; then one by one every little thing that had a sacred
memory clinging to it was put into her wallet or into the chest.

She paused.  There was still something else to be stript away from her,
belonging to that past on which she was going to turn her back for ever.
She put her thumb and her forefinger to her betrothal ring; but they
rested there, without drawing it off.  Romola's mind had been rushing
with an impetuous current towards this act, for which she was preparing:
the act of quitting a husband who had disappointed all her trust, the
act of breaking an outward tie that no longer represented the inward
bond of love.  But that force of outward symbols by which our active
life is knit together so as to make an inexorable external identity for
us, not to be shaken by our wavering consciousness, gave a strange
effect to this simple movement towards taking off her ring--a movement
which was but a small sequence of her energetic resolution.  It brought
a vague but arresting sense that she was somehow violently rending her
life in two: a presentiment that the strong impulse which had seemed to
exclude doubt and make her path clear might after all be blindness, and
that there was something in human bonds which must prevent them from
being broken with the breaking of illusions.

If that beloved Tito who had placed the betrothal ring on her finger was
not in any valid sense the same Tito whom she had ceased to love, why
should she return to him the sign of their union, and not rather retain
it as a memorial?  And this act, which came as a palpable demonstration
of her own and his identity, had a power unexplained to herself, of
shaking Romola.  It is the way with half the truth amidst which we live,
that it only haunts us and makes dull pulsations that are never born
into sound.  But there was a passionate voice speaking within her that
presently nullified all such muffled murmurs.

"It cannot be!  I cannot be subject to him.  He is false.  I shrink from
him.  I despise him!"

She snatched the ring from her finger and laid it on the table against
the pen with which she meant to write.  Again she felt that there could
be no law for her but the law of her affections.  That tenderness and
keen fellow-feeling for the near and the loved which are the main
outgrowth of the affections, had made the religion of her life: they had
made her patient in spite of natural impetuosity: they would have
sufficed to make her heroic.  But now all that strength was gone, or,
rather, it was converted into the strength of repulsion.  She had
recoiled from Tito in proportion to the energy of that young belief and
love which he had disappointed, of that lifelong devotion to her father
against which he had committed an irredeemable offence.  And it seemed
as if all motive had slipped away from her, except the indignation and
scorn that made her tear herself asunder from him.

She was not acting after any precedent, or obeying any adopted maxims.
The grand severity of the stoical philosophy in which her father had
taken care to instruct her, was familiar enough to her ears and lips,
and its lofty spirit had raised certain echoes within her; but she had
never used it, never needed it as a rule of life.  She had endured and
forborne because she loved: maxims which told her to feel less, and not
to cling close lest the onward course of great Nature should jar her,
had been as powerless on her tenderness as they had been on her father's
yearning for just fame.  She had appropriated no theories: she had
simply felt strong in the strength of affection, and life without that
energy came to her as an entirely new problem.

She was going to solve the problem in a way that seemed to her very
simple.  Her mind had never yet bowed to any obligation apart from
personal love and reverence; she had no keen sense of any other human
relations, and all she had to obey now was the instinct to sever herself
from the man she loved no longer.

Yet the unswerving resolution was accompanied with continually varying
phases of anguish.  And now that the active preparation for her
departure was almost finished, she lingered: she deferred writing the
irrevocable words of parting from all her little world.  The emotions of
the past weeks seemed to rush in again with cruel hurry, and take
possession even of her limbs.  She was going to write, and her hand
fell.  Bitter tears came now at the delusion which had blighted her
young years, tears very different from the sob of remembered happiness
with which she had looked at the circlet of pearls and the pink
hailstone.  And now she felt a tingling shame at the words of ignominy
she had cast, at Tito--"Have you robbed some one else who is _not_
dead?"  To have had such words wrung from her--to have uttered them to
her husband seemed a degradation of her whole life.  Hard speech between
those who have loved is hideous in the memory, like the sight of
greatness and beauty sunk into vice and rags.

That heart-cutting comparison of the present with the past urged itself
upon Romola till it even transformed itself into wretched sensations:
she seemed benumbed to everything but inward throbbings, and began to
feel the need of some hard contact.  She drew her hands tight along the
harsh knotted cord that hung from her waist.  She started to her feet
and seized the rough lid of the chest: there was nothing else to go in?
No.  She closed the lid, pressing her hand upon the rough carving, and
locked it.

Then she remembered that she had still to complete her equipment as a
Pinzochera.  The large leather purse or scarsella, with small coin in
it, had to be hung on the cord at her waist (her florins and small
jewels, presents from her godfather and cousin Brigida, were safely
fastened within her serge mantle)--and on the other side must hang the
rosary.

It did not occur to Romola, as she hung that rosary by her side, that
something else besides the mere garb would perhaps be necessary to
enable her to pass as a Pinzochera, and that her whole air and
expression were as little as possible like those of a sister whose
eyelids were used to be bent, and whose lips were used to move in silent
iteration.  Her inexperience prevented her from picturing distant
details, and it helped her proud courage in shutting out any foreboding
of danger and insult.  She did not know that any Florentine woman had
ever done exactly what she was going to do: unhappy wives often took
refuge with their friends, or in the cloister, she knew, but both those
courses were impossible to her; she had invented a lot for herself--to
go to the most learned woman in the world, Cassandra Fedele, at Venice,
and ask her how an instructed woman could support herself in a lonely
life there.

She was not daunted by the practical difficulties in the way or the dark
uncertainty at the end.  Her life could never be happy any more, but it
must not, could not, be ignoble.  And by a pathetic mixture of childish
romance with her woman's trials, the philosophy which had nothing to do
with this great decisive deed of hers had its place in her imagination
of the future: so far as she conceived her solitary loveless life at
all, she saw it animated by a proud stoical heroism, and by an
indistinct but strong purpose of labour, that she might be wise enough
to write something which would rescue her father's name from oblivion.
After all, she was only a young girl--this poor Romola, who had found
herself at the end of her joys.

There were other things yet to be done.  There was a small key in a
casket on the table--but now Romola perceived that her taper was dying
out, and she had forgotten to provide herself with any other light.  In
a few moments the room was in total darkness.  Feeling her way to the
nearest chair, she sat down to wait for the morning.

Her purpose in seeking the key had called up certain memories winch had
come back upon her during the past week with the new vividness that
remembered words always have for us when we have learned to give them a
new meaning.  Since the shook of the revelation which had seemed to
divide her for ever from Tito, that last interview with Dino had never
been for many hours together out of her mind.  And it solicited her all
the more, because while its remembered images pressed upon her almost
with the imperious force of sensations, they raised struggling thoughts
which resisted their influence.  She could not prevent herself from
hearing inwardly the dying prophetic voice saying again and again,--"The
man whose face was a blank loosed thy hand and departed; and as he went,
I could see his face, and it was the face of the great Tempter...  And
thou, Romola, didst wring thy hands and seek for water, and there was
none... and the plain was bare and stony again, and thou wast alone in
the midst of it.  And then it seemed that the night fell, and I saw no
more."  She could not prevent herself from dwelling with a sort of
agonised fascination on the wasted face; on the straining gaze at the
crucifix; on the awe which had compelled her to kneel; on the last
broken words and then the unbroken silence--on all the details of the
death-scene, which had seemed like a sudden opening into a world apart
from that of her lifelong knowledge.

But her mind was roused to resistance of impressions that, from being
obvious phantoms, seemed to be getting solid in the daylight.  As a
strong body struggles against fumes with the more violence when they
begin to be stifling, a strong soul struggles against phantasies with
all the more alarmed energy when they threaten to govern in the place of
thought.

What had the words of that vision to do with her real sorrows?  That
fitting of certain words was a mere chance; the rest was all vague--nay,
those words themselves were vague; they were determined by nothing but
her brother's memories and beliefs.  He believed there was something
fatal in pagan learning; he believed that celibacy was more holy than
marriage; he remembered their home, and all the objects in the library;
and of these threads the vision was woven.  What reasonable warrant
could she have had for believing in such a vision and acting on it?
None.  True as the voice of foreboding had proved, Romola saw with
unshaken conviction that to have renounced Tito in obedience to a
warning like that, would have been meagre-hearted folly.  Her trust had
been delusive, but she would have chosen over again to have acted on it
rather than be a creature led by phantoms and disjointed whispers in a
world where there was the large music of reasonable speech, and the warm
grasp of living hands.

But the persistent presence of these memories, linking themselves in her
imagination with her actual lot, gave her a glimpse of understanding
into the lives which had before lain utterly aloof from her sympathy--
the lives of the men and women who were led by such inward images and
voices.

"If they were only a little stronger in me," she said to herself, "I
should lose the sense of what that vision really was, and take it for a
prophetic light.  I might in time get to be a seer of visions myself,
like the Suora Maddalena, and Camilla Rucellai, and the rest."

Romola shuddered at the possibility.  All the instruction, all the main
influences of her life had gone to fortify her scorn of that sickly
superstition which led men and women, with eyes too weak for the
daylight, to sit in dark swamps and try to read human destiny by the
chance flame of wandering vapours.

And yet she was conscious of something deeper than that coincidence of
words which made the parting contact with her dying brother live anew in
her mind, and gave a new sisterhood to the wasted face.  If there were
much more of such experience as his in the world, she would like to
understand it--would even like to learn the thoughts of men who sank in
ecstasy before the pictured agonies of martyrdom.  There seemed to be
something more than madness in that supreme fellowship with suffering.
The springs were all dried up around her; she wondered what other waters
there were at which men drank and found strength in the desert.  And
those moments in the Duomo when she had sobbed with a mysterious
mingling of rapture and pain, while Fra Girolamo offered himself a
willing sacrifice for the people, came back to her as if they had been a
transient taste of some such far-off fountain.  But again she shrank
from impressions that were alluring her within the sphere of visions and
narrow fears which compelled men to outrage natural affections as Dino
had done.

This was the tangled web that Romola had in her mind as she sat weary in
the darkness.  No radiant angel came across the gloom with a clear
message for her.  In those times, as now, there were human beings who
never saw angels or heard perfectly clear messages.  Such truth as came
to them was brought confusedly in the voices and deeds of men not at all
like the seraphs of unfailing wing and piercing vision--men who believed
falsities as well as truths, and did the wrong as well as the right.
The helping hands stretched out to them were the hands of men who
stumbled and often saw dimly, so that these beings unvisited by angels
had no other choice than to grasp that stumbling guidance along the path
of reliance and action which is the path of life, or else to pause in
loneliness and disbelief, which is no path, but the arrest of inaction
and death.

And so Romola, seeing no ray across the darkness, and heavy with
conflict that changed nothing, sank at last to sleep.



CHAPTER THIRTY SEVEN.

THE TABERNACLE UNLOCKED.

Romola was waked by a tap at the door.  The cold light of early morning
was in the room, and Maso was come for the travelling-wallet.  The old
man could not help starting when she opened the door, and showed him,
instead of the graceful outline he had been used to, crowned with the
brightness of her hair, the thick folds of the grey mantle and the pale
face shadowed by the dark cowl.

"It is well, Maso," said Romola, trying to speak in the calmest voice,
and make the old man easy.  "Here is the wallet quite ready.  You will
go on quietly, and I shall not be far behind you.  When you get out of
the gates you may go more slowly, for I shall perhaps join you before
you get to Trespiano."

She closed the door behind him, and then put her hand on the key which
she had taken from the casket the last thing in the night.  It was the
original key of the little painted tabernacle: Tito had forgotten to
drown it in the Arno, and it had lodged, as such small things will, in
the corner of the embroidered scarsella which he wore with the purple
tunic.  One day, long after their marriage, Romola had found it there,
and had put it by, without using it, but with a sense of satisfaction
that the key was within reach.  The cabinet on which the tabernacle
stood had been moved to the side of the room, close to one of the
windows, where the pale morning light fell upon it so as to make the
painted forms discernible enough to Romola, who know them well,--the
triumphant Bacchus, with his clusters and his vine-clad spear, clasping
the crowned Ariadne; the Loves showering roses, the wreathed vessel, the
cunning-eyed dolphins, and the rippled sea: all encircled by a flowery
border, like a bower of paradise.  Romola looked at the familiar images
with new bitterness and repulsion: they seemed a more pitiable mockery
than ever on this chill morning, when she had waked up to wander in
loneliness.  They had been no tomb of sorrow, but a lying screen.
Foolish Ariadne! with her gaze of love, as if that bright face, with its
hyacinthine curls like tendrils among the vines, held the deep secret of
her life!

"Ariadne is wonderfully transformed," thought Romola.  "She would look
strange among the vines and the roses now."

She took up the mirror, and looked at herself once more.  But the sight
was so startling in this morning light that she laid it down again, with
a sense of shrinking almost as strong as that with which she had turned
from the joyous Ariadne.  The recognition of her own face, with the cowl
about it, brought back the dread lest she should be drawn at last into
fellowship with some wretched superstition--into the company of the
howling fanatics and weeping nuns who had been her contempt from
childhood till now.  She thrust the key into the tabernacle hurriedly:
hurriedly she opened it, and took out the crucifix, without looking at
it; then, with trembling fingers, she passed a cord through the little
ring, hung the crucifix round her neck, and hid it in the bosom of her
mantle.  "For Dino's sake," she said to herself.  Still there were the
letters to be written which Maso was to carry back from Bologna.  They
were very brief.  The first said--

"Tito, my love for you is dead; and therefore, so far as I was yours, I
too am dead.  Do not try to put in force any laws for the sake of
fetching me back: that would bring you no happiness.  The Romola you
married can never return.  I need explain nothing to you after the words
I uttered to you the last time we spoke long together.  If you supposed
them to be words of transient anger, you will know now that they were
the sign of an irreversible change.

"I think you will fulfil my wish that my bridal chest should be sent to
my godfather, who gave it me.  It contains my wedding-clothes and the
portraits and other relics of my father and mother."

She folded the ring inside this letter, and wrote Tito's name outside.
The next letter was to Bernardo del Nero:--

"Dearest Godfather,--If I could have been any good to your life by
staying I would not have gone away to a distance.  But now I am gone.
Do not ask the reason; and if you love my father, try to prevent any one
from seeking me.  I could not bear my life at Florence.  I cannot bear
to tell any one why.  Help to cover my lot in silence.  I have asked
that my bridal chest should be sent to you: when you open it, you will
know the reason.  Please to give all the things that were my mother's to
my cousin Brigida, and ask her to forgive me for not saying any words of
parting to her.

"Farewell, my second father.  The best thing I have in life is still to
remember your goodness and be grateful to you.

"Romola."

Romola put the letters, along with the crucifix, within the bosom of her
mantle, and then felt that everything was done.  She was ready now to
depart.

No one was stirring in the house, and she went almost as quietly as a
grey phantom down the stairs and into the silent street.  Her heart was
palpitating violently, yet she enjoyed the sense of her firm tread on
the broad flags--of the swift movement, which was like a chained-up
resolution set free at last.  The anxiety to carry out her act, and the
dread of any obstacle, averted sorrow; and as she reached the Ponte
Rubaconte, she felt less that Santa Croce was in her sight than that the
yellow streak of morning which parted the grey was getting broader and
broader, and that, unless she hastened her steps, she should have to
encounter faces.

Her simplest road was to go right on to the Borgo Pinti, and then along
by the walls to the _Porta_, San Gallo, from which she must leave the
city, and this road carried her by the Piazza di Santa Croco.  But she
walked as steadily and rapidly as ever through the piazza, not trusting
herself to look towards the church.  The thought that any eyes might be
turned on her with a look of curiosity and recognition, and that
indifferent minds might be set speculating on her private sorrows, made
Romola shrink physically as from the imagination of torture.  She felt
degraded even by that act of her husband from which she was helplessly
suffering.  But there was no sign that any eyes looked forth from
windows to notice this tall grey sister, with the firm step, and proud
attitude of the cowled head.  Her road lay aloof from the stir of early
traffic, and when she reached the Porta San Gallo, it was easy to pass
while a dispute was going forward about the toll for panniers of eggs
and market produce which were just entering.

Out!  Once past the houses of the Borgo, she would be beyond the last
fringe of Florence, the sky would be broad above her, and she would have
entered on her new life--a life of loneliness and endurance, but of
freedom.  She had been strong enough to snap asunder the bonds she had
accepted in blind faith: whatever befell her, she would no more feel the
breath of soft hated lips warm upon her cheek, no longer feel the breath
of an odious mind stifling her own.  The bare wintry morning, the chill
air, were welcome in their severity: the leafless trees, the sombre
hills, were not haunted by the gods of beauty and joy, whose worship she
had forsaken for ever.

But presently the light burst forth with sudden strength, and shadows
were thrown across the road.  It seemed that the sun was going to chase
away the greyness.  The light is perhaps never felt more strongly as a
divine presence stirring all those inarticulate sensibilities which are
our deepest life, than in these moments when it instantaneously awakens
the shadows.  A certain awe which inevitably accompanied this most
momentous act of her life became a more conscious element in Romola's
feeling as she found herself in the sudden presence of the impalpable
golden glory and the long shadow of herself that was not to be escaped.
Hitherto she had met no one but an occasional contadino with mules, and
the many turnings of the road on the level prevented her from seeing
that Maso was not very far ahead of her.  But when she had passed Pietra
and was on rising ground, she lifted up the hanging roof of her cowl and
looked eagerly before her.

The cowl was dropped again immediately.  She had seen, not Maso, but--
two monks, who were approaching within a few yards of her.  The edge of
her cowl making a pent-house on her brow had shut out the objects above
the level of her eyes, and for the last few moments she had been looking
at nothing but the brightness on the path and at her own shadow, tall
and shrouded like a dread spectre.

She wished now that she had not looked up.  Her disguise made her
especially dislike to encounter monks: they might expect some pious
passwords of which she knew nothing, and she walked along with a careful
appearance of unconsciousness till she had seen the skirts of the black
mantles pass by her.  The encounter had made her heart beat
disagreeably, for Romola had an uneasiness in her religious disguise, a
shame at this studied concealment, which was made more distinct by a
special effort to appear unconscious under actual glances.

But the black skirts would be gone the faster because they were going
down-hill; and seeing a great flat stone against a cypress that rose
from a projecting green bank, she yielded to the desire which the slight
shock had given her, to sit down and rest.

She turned her back on Florence, not meaning to look at it till the
monks were quite out of sight, and raising the edge of her cowl again
when she had seated herself, she discerned Maso and the mules at a
distance where it was not hopeless for her to overtake them, as the old
man would probably linger in expectation of her.

Meanwhile she might pause a little.  She was free and alone.



CHAPTER THIRTY EIGHT.

THE BLACK MARKS BECOME MAGICAL.

That journey of Tito's to Rome, which had removed many difficulties from
Romola's departure, had been resolved on quite suddenly, at a supper,
only the evening before.

Tito had set out towards that supper with agreeable expectations.  The
meats were likely to be delicate, the wines choice, the company
distinguished; for the place of entertainment was the Selva or Orto de'
Rucellai, or, as we should say, the Rucellai Gardens; and the host,
Bernardo Rucellai, was quite a typical Florentine grandee.  Even his
family name has a significance which is prettily symbolic: properly
understood, it may bring before us a little lichen, popularly named
_orcella_ or _roccella_, which grows on the rocks of Greek isles and in
the Canaries; and having drunk a great deal of light into its little
stems and button-heads, will, under certain circumstances, give it out
again as a reddish purple dye, very grateful to the eyes of men.  By
bringing the excellent secret of this dye, called _oricello_, from the
Levant to Florence, a certain merchant, who lived nearly a hundred years
before our Bernardo's time, won for himself and his descendants much
wealth, and the pleasantly-suggestive surname of Oricellari, or
Roccellari, which on Tuscan tongues speedily became Rucellai.

And our Bernardo, who stands out more prominently than the rest on this
purple background, had added all sorts of distinction to the family
name: he had married the sister of Lorenzo de' Medici, and had had the
most splendid wedding in the memory of Florentine upholstery; and for
these and other virtues he had been sent on embassies to France and
Venice, and had been chosen Gonfaloniere; he had not only built himself
a fine palace, but had finished putting the black and white marble
facade to the church of Santa Maria Novella; he had planted a garden
with rare trees, and had made it classic ground by receiving within it
the meetings of the Platonic Academy, orphaned by the death of Lorenzo;
he had written an excellent, learned book, of a new topographical sort,
about ancient Rome; he had collected antiquities; he had a pure
Latinity.  The simplest account of him, one sees, reads like a laudatory
epitaph, at the end of which the Greek and Ausonian Muses might be
confidently requested to tear their hair, and Nature to desist from any
second attempt to combine so many virtues with one set of viscera.

His invitation had been conveyed to Tito through Lorenzo Tornabuoni,
with an emphasis which would have suggested that the object of the
gathering was political, even if the public questions of the time had
been less absorbing.  As it was, Tito felt sure that some party purposes
were to be furthered by the excellent flavours of stewed fish and old
Greek wine; for Bernardo Rucellai was not simply an influential
personage, he was one of the elect Twenty who for three weeks had held
the reins of Florence.  This assurance put Tito in the best spirits as
he made his way to the Via della Scala, where the classic garden was to
be found: without it, he might have had some uneasy speculation as to
whether the high company he would have the honour of meeting was likely
to be dull as well as distinguished; for he had had experience of
various dull suppers even in the Rucellai gardens, and especially of the
dull philosophic sort, wherein he had not only been called upon to
accept an entire scheme of the universe (which would have been easy to
him), but to listen to an exposition of the same, from the origin of
things to their complete ripeness in the tractate of the philosopher
then speaking.

It was a dark evening, and it was only when Tito crossed the occasional
light of a lamp suspended before an image of the Virgin, that the
outline of his figure was discernible enough for recognition.  At such
moments any one caring to watch his passage from one of these lights to
another might have observed that the tall and graceful personage with
the mantle folded round him was followed constantly by a very different
form, thickset and elderly, in a serge tunic and felt hat.  The
conjunction might have been taken for mere chance, since there were many
passengers along the streets at this hour.  But when Tito stopped at the
gate of the Rucellai gardens, the figure behind stopped too.  The
_sportello_, or smaller door of the gate, was already being held open by
the servant, who, in the distraction of attending to some question, had
not yet closed it since the last arrival, and Tito turned in rapidly,
giving his name to the servant, and passing on between the evergreen
bushes that shone like metal in the torchlight.  The follower turned in
too.

"Your name?" said the servant.

"Baldassarre Calvo," was the immediate answer.

"You are not a guest; the guests have all passed."

"I belong to Tito Melema, who has just gone in.  I am to wait in the
gardens."

The servant hesitated.  "I had orders to admit only guests.  Are you a
servant of Messer Tito?"

"No, friend, I am not a servant; I am a scholar."

There are men to whom you need only say, "I am a buffalo," in a certain
tone of quiet confidence, and they will let you pass.  The porter gave
way at once, Baldassarre entered, and heard the door closed and chained
behind him, as he too disappeared among the shining bushes.

Those ready and firm answers argued a great change in Baldassarre since
the last meeting face to face with Tito, when the dagger broke in two.

The change had declared itself in a startling way.

At the moment when the shadow of Tito passed in front of the hovel as he
departed homeward, Baldassarre was sitting in that state of after-tremor
known to every one who is liable to great outbursts of passion: a state
in which physical powerlessness is sometimes accompanied by an
exceptional lucidity of thought, as if that disengagement of excited
passion had carried away a fire-mist and left clearness behind it.  He
felt unable to rise and walk away just yet; his limbs seemed benumbed;
he was cold, and his hands shook.  But in that bodily helplessness he
sat surrounded, not by the habitual dimness and vanishing shadows, but
by the clear images of the past; he was living again in an unbroken
course through that life which seemed a long preparation for the taste
of bitterness.

For some minutes he was too thoroughly absorbed by the images to reflect
on the fact that he saw them, and note the fact as a change.  But when
that sudden clearness had travelled through the distance, and came at
last to rest on the scene just gone by, he felt fully where he was: he
remembered Monna Lisa and Tessa.  Ah! _he_ then was the mysterious
husband; he who had another wife in the Via de' Bardi.  It was time to
pick up the broken dagger and go--go and leave no trace of himself; for
to hide his feebleness seemed the thing most like power that was left to
him.  He leaned to take up the fragments of the dagger; then he turned
towards the book which lay open at his side.  It was a fine large
manuscript, an odd volume of Pausanias.  The moonlight was upon it, and
he could see the large letters at the head of the page:

  MESSENIKA.  KB.  [In Greek characters.]

In old days he had known Pausanias familiarly; yet an hour or two ago he
had been looking hopelessly at that page, and it had suggested no more
meaning to him than if the letters had been black weather-marks on a
wall; but at this moment they were once more the magic signs that
conjure up a world.  That moonbeam falling on the letters had raised
Messenia before him, and its struggle against the Spartan oppression.

He snatched up the book, but the light was too pale for him to read
further by.  No matter: he knew that chapter; he read inwardly.  He saw
the stoning of the traitor Aristocrates--stoned by a whole people, who
cast him out from their borders to lie unburied, and set up a pillar
with verses upon it telling how Time had brought home justice to the
unjust.  The words arose within him, and stirred innumerable vibrations
of memory.  He forgot that he was old: he could almost have shouted.
The light was come again, mother of knowledge and joy!  In that
exultation his limbs recovered their strength: he started up with his
broken dagger and book, and went out under the broad moonlight.

It was a nipping frosty air, but Baldassarre could feel no chill--he
only felt the glow of conscious power.  He walked about and paused on
all the open spots of that high ground, and looked down on the domed and
towered city, sleeping darkly under its sleeping guardians, the
mountains; on the pale gleam of the river; on the valley vanishing
towards the peaks of snow; and felt himself master of them all.

That sense of mental empire which belongs to us all in moments of
exceptional clearness was intensified for him by the long days and
nights in which memory had been little more than the consciousness of
something gone.  That city, which had been a weary labyrinth, was
material that he could subdue to his purposes now: his mind glanced
through its affairs with flashing conjecture; he was once more a man who
knew cities, whose sense of vision was instructed with large experience,
and who felt the keen delight of holding all things in the grasp of
language.  Names!  Images!--his mind rushed through its wealth without
pausing, like one who enters on a great inheritance.

But amidst all that rushing eagerness there was one End presiding in
Baldassarre's consciousness,--a dark deity in the inmost cell, who only
seemed forgotten while his hecatomb was being prepared.  And when the
first triumph in the certainty of recovered power had had its way, his
thoughts centred themselves on Tito.  That fair slippery viper could not
escape him now; thanks to struggling justice, the heart that never
quivered with tenderness for another had its sensitive selfish fibres
that could be reached by the sharp point of anguish.  The soul that
bowed to no right, bowed to the great lord of mortals, Pain.

He could search into every secret of Tito's life now: he knew some of
the secrets already, and the failure of the broken dagger, which seemed
like frustration, had been the beginning of achievement.  Doubtless that
sudden rage had shaken away the obstruction which stifled his soul.
Twice before, when his memory had partially returned, it had been in
consequence of sudden excitation: once when he had had to defend himself
from an enraged dog: once when he had been overtaken by the waves, and
had had to scramble up a rock to save himself.

Yes, but if this time, as then, the light were to die out, and the
dreary conscious blank come back again!  This time the light was
stronger and steadier; but what security was there that before the
morrow the dark fog would not be round him again?  Even the fear seemed
like the beginning of feebleness: he thought with alarm that he might
sink the faster for this excited vigil of his on the hill, which was
expending his force; and after seeking anxiously for a sheltered corner
where he might lie down, he nestled at last against a heap of warm
garden straw, and so fell asleep.

When he opened his eyes again it was daylight.  The first moments were
filled with strange bewilderment: he was a man with a double identity;
to which had he awaked? to the life of dim-sighted sensibilities like
the sad heirship of some fallen greatness, or to the life of recovered
power?  Surely the last, for the events of the night all came back to
him: the recognition of the page in Pausanias, the crowding resurgence
of facts and names, the sudden wide prospect which had given him such a
moment as that of the Maenad in the glorious amaze of her morning waking
on the mountain top.

He took up the book again, he read, he remembered without reading.  He
saw a name, and the images of deeds rose with it: he saw the mention of
a deed, and he linked it with a name.  There were stories of inexpiable
crimes, but stories also of guilt that seemed successful.  There were
sanctuaries for swift-footed miscreants: baseness had its armour, and
the weapons of justice sometimes broke against it.  What then?  If
baseness triumphed everywhere else, if it could heap to itself all the
goods of the world and even hold the keys of hell, it would never
triumph over the hatred which it had itself awakened.  It could devise
no torture that would seem greater than the torture of submitting to its
smile.  Baldassarre felt the indestructible independent force of a
supreme emotion, which knows no terror, and asks for no motive, which is
itself an ever-burning motive, consuming all other desire.  And now in
this morning light, when the assurance came again that the fine fibres
of association were active still, and that his recovered self had not
departed, all his gladness was but the hope of vengeance.

From that time till the evening on which we have seen him enter the
Rucellai gardens, he had been incessantly, but cautiously, inquiring
into Tito's position and all his circumstances, and there was hardly a
day on which he did not contrive to follow his movements.  But he wished
not to arouse any alarm in Tito: he wished to secure a moment when the
hated favourite of blind fortune was at the summit of confident ease,
surrounded by chief men on whose favour he depended.  It was not any
retributive payment or recognition of himself for his own behoof, on
which Baldassarre's whole soul was bent: it was to find the sharpest
edge of disgrace and shame by which a selfish smiler could be pierced;
it was to send through his marrow the most sudden shock of dread.  He
was content to lie hard, and live stintedly--he had spent the greater
part of his remaining money in buying another poniard: his hunger and
his thirst were after nothing exquisite but an exquisite vengeance.  He
had avoided addressing himself to any one whom he suspected of intimacy
with Tito, lest an alarm raised in Tito's mind should urge him either to
flight or to some other counteracting measure which hard-pressed
ingenuity might devise.  For this reason he had never entered Nello's
shop, which he observed that Tito frequented, and he had turned aside to
avoid meeting Piero di Cosimo.

The possibility of frustration gave added eagerness to his desire that
the great opportunity he sought should not be deferred.  The desire was
eager in him on another ground; he trembled lest his memory should go
again.  Whether from the agitating presence of that fear, or from some
other causes, he had twice felt a sort of mental dizziness, in which the
inward sense or imagination seemed to be losing the distinct forms of
things.  Once he had attempted to enter the Palazzo Vecchio and make his
way into a council-chamber where Tito was, and had failed.  But now, on
this evening, he felt that his occasion was come.



CHAPTER THIRTY NINE.

A SUPPER IN THE RUCELLAI GARDENS.

On entering the handsome pavilion, Tito's quick glance soon discerned in
the selection of the guests the confirmation of his conjecture that the
object of the gathering was political, though, perhaps, nothing more
distinct than that strengthening of party which comes from
good-fellowship.  Good dishes and good wine were at that time believed
to heighten the consciousness of political preferences, and in the
inspired ease of after-supper talk it was supposed that people
ascertained their own opinions with a clearness quite inaccessible to
uninvited stomachs.  The Florentines were a sober and frugal people; but
wherever men have gathered wealth, Madonna della Gozzoviglia and San
Buonvino have had their worshippers; and the Rucellai were among the few
Florentine families who kept a great table and lived splendidly.  It was
not probable that on this evening there would be any attempt to apply
high philosophic theories; and there could be no objection to the bust
of Plato looking on, or even to the modest presence of the cardinal
virtues in fresco on the walls.

That bust of Plato had been long used to look down on conviviality of a
more transcendental sort, for it had been brought from Lorenzo's villa
after his death, when the meetings of the Platonic Academy had been
transferred to these gardens.  Especially on every thirteenth of
November, reputed anniversary of Plato's death, it had looked down from
under laurel leaves on a picked company of scholars and philosophers,
who met to eat and drink with moderation, and to discuss and admire,
perhaps with less moderation, the doctrines of the great master:--on
Pico della Mirandola, once a Quixotic young genius with long curls,
astonished at his own powers and astonishing Rome with heterodox theses;
afterwards a more humble student with a consuming passion for inward
perfection, having come to find the universe more astonishing than his
own cleverness:--on innocent, laborious Marsilio Ficino, picked out
young to be reared as a Platonic philosopher, and fed on Platonism in
all its stages till his mind was perhaps a little pulpy from that too
exclusive diet:--on Angelo Poliziano, chief literary genius of that age,
a born poet, and a scholar without dulness, whose phrases had blood in
them and are alive still:--or, further back, on Leon Battista Alberti, a
reverend senior when those three were young, and of a much grander type
than they, a robust, universal mind, at once practical and theoretic,
artist, man of science, inventor, poet:--and on many more valiant
workers whose names are not registered where every day we turn the leaf
to read them, but whose labours make a part, though an unrecognised
part, of our inheritance, like the ploughing and sowing of past
generations.

Bernardo Rucellai was a man to hold a distinguished place in that
Academy even before he became its host and patron.  He was still in the
prime of life, not more than four and forty, with a somewhat haughty,
cautiously dignified presence; conscious of an amazingly pure Latinity,
but, says Erasmus, not to be caught speaking Latin--no word of Latin to
be sheared off him by the sharpest of Teutons.  He welcomed Tito with
more marked favour than usual and gave him a place between Lorenzo
Tornabuoni and Giannozzo Pucci, both of them accomplished young members
of the Medicean party.

Of course the talk was the lightest in the world while the brass bowl
filled with scented water was passing round, that the company might wash
their hands, and rings flashed on white fingers under the wax-lights,
and there was the pleasant fragrance of fresh white damask newly come
from France.  The tone of remark was a very common one in those times.
Some one asked what Dante's pattern old Florentine would think if the
life could come into him again under his leathern belt and bone clasp,
and he could see silver forks on the table?  And it was agreed on all
hands that the habits of posterity would be very surprising to
ancestors, if ancestors could only know them.

And while the silver forks were just dallying with the appetising
delicacies that introduced the more serious business of the supper--such
as morsels of liver, cooked to that exquisite point that they would melt
in the mouth--there was time to admire the designs on the enamelled
silver centres of the brass service, and to say something, as usual,
about the silver dish for confetti, a masterpiece of Antonio Pollajuolo,
whom patronising Popes had seduced from his native Florence to more
gorgeous Rome.

"Ah, I remember," said Niccolo Ridolfi, a middle-aged man, with that
negligent ease of manner which, seeming to claim nothing, is really
based on the lifelong consciousness of commanding rank--"I remember our
Antonio getting bitter about his chiselling and enamelling of these
metal things, and taking in a fury to painting, because, said he, `the
artist who puts his work into gold and silver, puts his brains into the
melting-pot.'"

"And that is not unlikely to be a true foreboding of Antonio's," said
Giannozzo Pucci.  "If this pretty war with Pisa goes on, and the revolt
only spreads a little to our other towns, it is not only our silver
dishes that are likely to go; I doubt whether Antonio's silver saints
round the altar of San Giovanni will not some day vanish from the eyes
of the faithful to be worshipped more devoutly in the form of coin."

"The Frate is preparing us for that already," said Tornabuoni.  "He is
telling the people that God will not have silver crucifixes and starving
stomachs; and that the church is best adorned with the gems of holiness
and the fine gold of brotherly love."

"A very useful doctrine of war-finance, as many a Condottiere has
found," said Bernardo Rucellai, drily.  "But politics come on after the
confetti, Lorenzo, when we can drink wine enough to wash them down; they
are too solid to be taken with roast and boiled."

"Yes, indeed," said Niccolo Ridolfi.  "Our Luigi Pulci would have said
this delicate boiled kid must be eaten with an impartial mind.  I
remember one day at Careggi, when Luigi was in his rattling vein, he was
maintaining that nothing perverted the palate like opinion.  `Opinion,'
said he, `corrupts the saliva--that's why men took to pepper.
Scepticism is the only philosophy that doesn't bring a taste in the
mouth.'  `Nay,' says poor Lorenzo de' Medici, `you must be out there,
Luigi.  Here is this untainted sceptic, Matteo Franco, who wants hotter
sauce than any of us.'  `Because he has a strong opinion of himself,'
flashes out Luigi, which is the original egg of all other opinion.  _He_
a sceptic?  He believes in the immortality of his own verses.  He is
such a logician as that preaching friar who described the pavement of
the bottomless pit.  Poor Luigi! his mind was like sharpest steel that
can touch nothing without cutting."

"And yet a very gentle-hearted creature," said Giannozzo Pucci.  "It
seemed to me his talk was a mere blowing of soap-bubbles.  What
dithyrambs he went into about eating and drinking! and yet he was as
temperate as a butterfly."

The light talk and the solid eatables were not soon at an end, for after
the roast and boiled meats came the indispensable capon and game, and,
crowning glory of a well-spread table, a peacock cooked according to the
receipt of Apicius for cooking partridges, namely, with the feathers on,
but not plucked afterwards, as that great authority ordered concerning
his partridges; on the contrary, so disposed on the dish that it might
look as much as possible like a live peacock taking its unboiled repose.
Great was the skill required in that confidential servant who was the
official carver, respectfully to turn the classical though insipid bird
on its back, and expose the plucked breast from which he was to dispense
a delicate slice to each of the honourable company, unless any one
should be of so independent a mind as to decline that expensive
toughness and prefer the vulgar digestibility of capon.

Hardly any one was so bold.  Tito quoted Horace and dispersed his slice
in small particles over his plate; Bernardo Rucellai made a learned
observation about the ancient price of peacocks' eggs, but did not
pretend to eat his slice; and Niccolo Ridolfi held a mouthful on his
fork while he told a favourite story of Luigi Pulci's, about a man of
Siena, who, wanting to give a splendid entertainment at moderate
expense, bought a wild goose, cut off its beak and webbed feet, and
boiled it in its feathers, to pass for a pea-hen.

In fact, very little peacock was eaten; but there was the satisfaction
of sitting at a table where peacock was served up in a remarkable
manner, and of knowing that such caprices were not within reach of any
but those who supped with the very wealthiest men.  And it would have
been rashness to speak slightingly of peacock's flesh, or any other
venerable institution, at a time when Fra Girolamo was teaching the
disturbing doctrine that it was not the duty of the rich to be luxurious
for the sake of the poor.

Meanwhile, in the chill obscurity that surrounded this centre of warmth,
and light, and savoury odours, the lonely disowned man was walking in
gradually narrowing circuits.  He paused among the trees, and looked in
at the windows, which made brilliant pictures against the gloom.  He
could hear the laughter; he could see Tito gesticulating with careless
grace, and hear his voice, now alone, now mingling in the merry
confusion of interlacing speeches.  Baldassarre's mind was highly
strung.  He was preparing himself for the moment when he could win his
entrance into this brilliant company; and he had a savage satisfaction
in the sight of Tito's easy gaiety, which seemed to be preparing the
unconscious victim for more effective torture.

But the men seated among the branching tapers and the flashing cups
could know nothing of the pale fierce face that watched them from
without.  The light can be a curtain as well as the darkness.

And the talk went on with more eagerness as it became less disconnected
and trivial.  The sense of citizenship was just then strongly forced
even on the most indifferent minds.  What the overmastering Fra Girolamo
was saying and prompting was really uppermost in the thoughts of every
one at table; and before the stewed fish was removed, and while the
favourite sweets were yet to come, his name rose to the surface of the
conversation, and, in spite of Rucellai's previous prohibition, the talk
again became political.  At first, while the servants remained present,
it was mere gossip: what had been done in the Palazzo on the first day's
voting for the Great Council; how hot-tempered and domineering Francesco
Valori was, as if he were to have everything his own way by right of his
austere virtue, and how it was clear to everybody who heard Soderini's
speeches in favour of the Great Council and also heard the Frate's
sermons, that they were both kneaded in the same trough.

"My opinion is," said Niccolo Ridolfi, "that the Frate has a longer head
for public matters than Soderini or any Piagnone among them: you may
depend on it that Soderini is his mouthpiece more than he is
Soderini's."

"No, Niccolo; there I differ from you," said Bernardo Ruccellai: "the
Frate has an acute mind, and readily sees what will serve his own ends;
but it is not likely that Pagolantonio Soderini, who has had long
experience of affairs, and has specially studied the Venetian Council,
should be much indebted to a monk for ideas on that subject.  No, no;
Soderini loads the cannon; though, I grant you, Fra Girolamo brings the
powder and lights the match.  He is master of the people, and the people
are getting master of us.  Ecco!"

"Well," said Lorenzo Tornabuoni, presently, when the room was clear of
servants, and nothing but wine was passing round, "whether Soderini is
indebted or not, _we_ are indebted to the Frate for the general amnesty
which has gone along with the scheme of the Council.  We might have done
without the fear of God and the reform of morals being passed by a
majority of black beans; but that excellent proposition, that our
Medicean heads should be allowed to remain comfortably on our shoulders,
and that we should not be obliged to hand over our property in fines,
has my warm approval, and it is my belief that nothing but the Frate's
predominance could have procured that for us.  And you may rely on it
that Fra Girolamo is as firm as a rock on that point of promoting peace.
I have had an interview with him."

There was a murmur of surprise and curiosity at the farther end of the
table; but Bernardo Rucellai simply nodded, as if he knew what
Tornabuoni had to say, and wished him to go on.

"Yes," proceeded Tornabuoni, "I have been favoured with an interview in
the Frate's own cell, which, let me tell you, is not a common favour;
for I have reason to believe that even Francesco Valori very seldom sees
him in private.  However, I think he saw me the more willingly because I
was not a ready-made follower, but had to be converted.  And, for my
part, I see clearly enough that the only safe and wise policy for us
Mediceans to pursue is to throw our strength into the scale of the
Frate's party.  We are not strong enough to make head on our own behalf;
and if the Frate and the popular party were upset, every one who hears
me knows perfectly well what other party would be uppermost just now:
Nerli, Alberti, Pazzi, and the rest--_Arrabbiati_, as somebody
christened them the other day--who, instead of giving us an amnesty,
would be inclined to fly at our throats like mad dogs, and not be
satisfied till they had banished half of us."

There were strong interjections of assent to this last sentence of
Tornabuoni's, as he paused and looked round a moment.

"A wise dissimulation," he went on, "is the only course for moderate
rational men in times of violent party feeling.  I need hardly tell this
company what are my real political attachments: I am not the only man
here who has strong personal ties to the banished family; but, apart
from any such ties, I agree with my more experienced friends, who are
allowing me to speak for them in their presence, that the only lasting
and peaceful state of things for Florence is the predominance of some
single family interest.  This theory of the Frate's, that we are to have
a popular government, in which every man is to strive only for the
general good, and know no party names, is a theory that may do for some
isle of Cristoforo Colombo's finding, but will never do for our fine old
quarrelsome Florence.  A change must come before long, and with patience
and caution we have every chance of determining the change in our
favour.  Meanwhile, the best thing we can do will be to keep the Frate's
flag flying, for if any other were to be hoisted just now it would be a
black flag for us."

"It's true," said Niccolo Ridolfi, in a curt decisive way.  "What you
say is true, Lorenzo.  For my own part, I am too old for anybody to
believe that I've changed my feathers.  And there are certain of us--our
old Bernardo del Nero for one--whom you would never persuade to borrow
another man's shield.  But we can lie still, like sleepy old dogs; and
it's clear enough that barking would be of no use just now.  As for this
psalm-singing party, who vote for nothing but the glory of God, and want
to make believe we can all love each other, and talk as if vice could be
swept out with a besom by the Magnificent Eight, their day will not be a
long one.  After all the talk of scholars, there are but two sorts of
government: one where men show their teeth at each other, and one where
men show their tongues and lick the feet of the strongest.  They'll get
their Great Council finally voted to-morrow--that's certain enough--and
they'll think they've found out a new plan of government; but as sure as
there's a human skin under every lucco in the Council, their new plan
will end like every other, in snarling or in licking.  That's my view of
things as a plain man.  Not that I consider it becoming in men of family
and following, who have got others depending on their constancy and on
their sticking to their colours, to go a-hunting with a fine net to
catch reasons in the air, like doctors of law.  I say frankly that, as
the head of my family, I shall be true to my old alliances; and I have
never yet seen any chalk-mark on political reasons to tell me which is
true and which is false.  My friend Bernardo Rucellai here is a man of
reasons, I know, and I have no objection to anybody's finding fine-spun
reasons for me, so that they don't interfere with my actions as a man of
family who has faith to keep with his connections."

"If that is an appeal to me, Niccolo," said Bernardo Rucellai, with a
formal dignity, in amusing contrast with Ridolfi's curt and pithy ease,
"I may take this opportunity of saying, that while my wishes are partly
determined by long-standing personal relations, I cannot enter into any
positive schemes with persons over whose actions I have no control.  I
myself might be content with a restoration of the old order of things;
but with modifications--with important modifications.  And the one point
on which I wish to declare my concurrence with Lorenzo Tornabuoni is,
that the best policy to be pursued by our friends is, to throw the
weight of their interest into the scale of the popular party.  For
myself, I condescend to no dissimulation; nor do I at present see the
party or the scheme that commands my full assent.  In all alike there is
crudity and confusion of ideas, and of all the twenty men who are my
colleagues in the present crisis, there is not one with whom I do not
find myself in wide disagreement."

Niccolo Ridolfi shrugged his shoulders, and left it to some one else to
take up the ball.  As the wine went round the talk became more and more
frank and lively, and the desire of several at once to be the chief
speaker, as usual caused the company to break up into small knots of two
and three.

It was a result which had been foreseen by Lorenzo Tornabuoni and
Giannozzo Pucci, and they were among the first to turn aside from the
highroad of general talk and enter into a special conversation with
Tito, who sat between them; gradually pushing away their seats, and
turning their backs on the table and wine.

"In truth, Melema," Tornabuoni was saying at this stage, laying one
hose-clad leg across the knee of the other, and caressing his ankle, "I
know of no man in Florence who can serve our party better than you.  You
see what most of our friends are: men who can no more hide their
prejudices than a dog can hide the natural tone of his bark, or eke men
whose political ties are so notorious, that they must always be objects
of suspicion.  Giannozzo here, and I, I flatter myself, are able to
overcome that suspicion; we have that power of concealment and finesse,
without which a rational cultivated man, instead of having any
prerogative, is really at a disadvantage compared with a wild bull or a
savage.  But, except yourself, I know of no one else on whom we could
rely for the necessary discretion."

"Yes," said Giannozzo Pucci, laying his hand on Tito's shoulder, "the
fact is, Tito mio, you can help us better than if you were Ulysses
himself, for I am convinced that Ulysses often made himself
disagreeable.  To manage men one ought to have a sharp mind in a velvet
sheath.  And there is not a soul in Florence who could undertake a
business like this journey to Rome, for example, with the same safety
that you can.  There is your scholarship, which may always be a pretext
for such journeys; and what is better, there is your talent, which it
would be harder to match than your scholarship.  Niccolo Macchiavelli
might have done for us if he had been on our side, but hardly so well.
He is too much bitten with notions, and has not your power of
fascination.  All the worse for him.  He has lost a great chance in
life, and you have got it."

"Yes," said Tornabuoni, lowering his voice in a significant manner, "you
have only to play your game well, Melema, and the future belongs to you.
For the Medici, you may rely upon it, will keep a foot in Rome as well
as in Florence, and the time may not be far-off when they will be able
to make a finer career for their adherents even than they did in old
days.  Why shouldn't you take orders some day?  There's a cardinal's hat
at the end of that road, and you would not be the first Greek who has
worn that ornament."

Tito laughed gaily.  He was too acute not to measure Tornabuoni's
exaggerated flattery, but still the flattery had a pleasant flavour.

"My joints are not so stiff yet," he said, "that I can't be induced to
run without such a high prize as that.  I think the income of an abbey
or two held `in commendam,' without the trouble of getting my head
shaved, would satisfy me at present."

"I was not joking," said Tornabuoni, with grave suavity; "I think a
scholar would always be the better off for taking orders.  But we'll
talk of that another time.  One of the objects to be first borne in
mind, is that you should win the confidence of the men who hang about
San Marco; that is what Giannozzo and I shall do, but you may carry it
farther than we can, because you are less observed.  In that way you can
get a thorough knowledge of their doings, and you will make a broader
screen for your agency on our side.  Nothing of course can be done
before you start for Rome, because this bit of business between Piero
de' Medici and the French nobles must be effected at once.  I mean when
you come back, of course; I need say no more.  I believe you could make
yourself the pet votary of San Marco, if you liked; but you are wise
enough to know that effective dissimulation is never immoderate."

"If it were not that an adhesion to the popular side is necessary to
your safety as an agent of our party, Tito mio," said Giannozzo Pucci,
who was more fraternal and less patronising in his manner than
Tornabuoni, "I could have wished your skill to have been employed in
another way, for which it is still better fitted.  But now we must look
out for some other man among us who will manage to get into the
confidence of our sworn enemies, the Arrabbiati; we need to know their
movements more than those of the Frate's party, who are strong enough to
play above-board.  Still, it would have been a difficult thing for you,
from your known relations with the Medici a little while back, and that
sort of kinship your wife has with Bernardo del Nero.  We must find a
man who has no distinguished connections, and who has not yet taken any
side."

Tito was pushing his hair backward automatically, as his manner was, and
looking straight at Pucci with a scarcely perceptible smile on his lip.

"No need to look out for any one else," he said, promptly.  "I can
manage the whole business with perfect ease.  I will engage to make
myself the special confidant of that thick-headed Dolfo Spini, and know
his projects before he knows them himself."

Tito seldom spoke so confidently of his own powers, but he was in a
state of exaltation at the sudden opening of a new path before him,
where fortune seemed to have hung higher prizes than any he had thought
of hitherto.  Hitherto he had seen success only in the form of favour;
it now flashed on him in the shape of power--of such power as is
possible to talent without traditional ties, and without beliefs.  Each
party that thought of him as a tool might become dependent on him.  His
position as an alien, his indifference to the ideas or prejudices of the
men amongst whom he moved, were suddenly transformed into advantages; he
became newly conscious of his own adroitness in the presence of a game
that he was called on to play.  And all the motives which might have
made Tito shrink from the triple deceit that came before him as a
tempting game, had been slowly strangled in him by the successive
falsities of his life.

Our lives make a moral tradition for our individual selves, as the life
of mankind at large makes a moral tradition for the race; and to have
once acted nobly seems a reason why we should always be noble.  But Tito
was feeling the effect of an opposite tradition: he had won no memories
of self-conquest and perfect faithfulness from which he could have a
sense of falling.

The triple colloquy went on with growing spirit till it was interrupted
by a call from the table.  Probably the movement came from the listeners
in the party, who were afraid lest the talkers should tire themselves.
At all events it was agreed that there had been enough of gravity, and
Rucellai had just ordered new flasks of Montepulciano.

"How many minstrels are there among us?" he said, when there had been a
general rallying round the table.  "Melema, I think you are the chief:
Matteo will give you the lute."

"Ah, yes!" said Giannozzo Pucci, "lead the last chorus from Poliziano's
`Orfeo,' that you have found such an excellent measure for, and we will
all fall in:--

  "`Ciascum segua, o Bacco, te:
  Bacco, Bacco, evoe, evoe!'"

The servant put the lute into Tito's hands, and then said something in
an undertone to his master.  A little subdued questioning and answering
went on between them, while Tito touched the lute in a preluding way to
the strain of the chorus, and there was a confusion of speech and
musical humming all round the table.  Bernardo Rucellai had said, "Wait
a moment, Melema;" but the words had been unheard by Tito, who was
leaning towards Pucci, and singing low to him the phrases of the
Maenad-chorus.  He noticed nothing until the buzz round the table
suddenly ceased, and the notes of his own voice, with its soft low-toned
triumph, "Evoe, evoe!" fell in startling isolation.

It was a strange moment.  Baldassarre had moved round the table till he
was opposite Tito, and as the hum ceased there might be seen for an
instant Baldassarre's fierce dark eyes bent on Tito's bright smiling
unconsciousness, while the low notes of triumph dropped from his lips
into the silence.

Tito looked up with a slight start, and his lips turned pale, but he
seemed hardly more moved than Giannozzo Pucci, who had looked up at the
same moment--or even than several others round the table; for that
sallow deep-lined face with the hatred in its eyes seemed a terrible
apparition across the wax-lit ease and gaiety.  And Tito quickly
recovered some self-command.  "A mad old man--he looks like it--he _is_
mad!" was the instantaneous thought that brought some courage with it;
for he could conjecture no inward change in Baldassarre since they had
met before.  He just let his eyes fall and laid the lute on the table
with apparent ease; but his fingers pinched the neck of the lute hard
while he governed his head and his glance sufficiently to look with an
air of quiet appeal towards Bernardo Rucellai, who said at once--

"Good man, what is your business?  What is the important declaration
that you have to make?"

"Messer Bernardo Rucellai, I wish you and your honourable friends to
know in what sort of company you are sitting.  There is a traitor among
you."

There was a general movement of alarm.  Every one present, except Tito,
thought of political danger and not of private injury.

Baldassarre began to speak as if he were thoroughly assured of what he
had to say; but, in spite of his long preparation for this moment, there
was the tremor of overmastering excitement in his voice.  His passion
shook him.  He went on, but he did not say what he had meant to say.  As
he fixed his eyes on Tito again the passionate words were like blows--
they defied premeditation.

"There is a man among you who is a scoundrel, a liar, a robber.  I was a
father to him.  I took him from beggary when he was a child.  I reared
him, I cherished him, I taught him, I made him a scholar.  My head has
lain hard that his might have a pillow.  And he left me in slavery; he
sold the gems that were mine, and when I came again, he denied me."

The last words had been uttered with almost convulsed agitation, and
Baldassarre paused, trembling.  All glances were turned on Tito, who was
now looking straight at Baldassarre.  It was a moment of desperation
that annihilated all feeling in him, except the determination to risk
anything for the chance of escape.  And he gathered confidence from the
agitation by which Baldassarre was evidently shaken.  He had ceased to
pinch the neck of the lute, and had thrust his thumbs into his belt,
while his lips had begun to assume a slight curl.  He had never yet done
an act of murderous cruelty even to the smallest animal that could utter
a cry, but at that moment he would have been capable of treading the
breath from a smiling child for the sake of his own safety.

"What does this mean, Melema?" said Bernardo Rucellai, in a tone of
cautious surprise.  He, as well as the rest of the company, felt
relieved that the tenor of the accusation was not political.

"Messer Bernardo," said Tito, "I believe this man is mad.  I did not
recognise him the first time he encountered me in Florence, but I know
now that he is the servant who years ago accompanied me and my adoptive
father to Greece, and was dismissed on account of misdemeanours.  His
name is Jacopo di Nola.  Even at that time I believe his mind was
unhinged, for, without any reason, he had conceived a strange hatred
towards me; and now I am convinced that he is labouring under a mania
which causes him to mistake his identity.  He has already attempted my
life since he has been in Florence; and I am in constant danger from
him.  But he is an object of pity rather than of indignation.  It is too
certain that my father is dead.  You have only my word for it; but I
must leave it to your judgment how far it is probable that a man of
intellect and learning would have been lurking about in dark corners for
the last month with the purpose of assassinating me; or how far it is
probable that, if this man were my second father, I could have any
motive for denying him.  That story about my being rescued from beggary
is the vision of a diseased brain.  But it will be a satisfaction to me
at least if you will demand from him proofs of his identity, lest any
malignant person should choose to make this mad impeachment a reproach
to me."

Tito had felt more and more confidence as he went on; the lie was not so
difficult when it was once begun; and as the words fell easily from his
lips, they gave him a sense of power such as men feel when they have
begun a muscular feat successfully.  In this way he acquired boldness
enough to end with a challenge for proofs.

Baldassarre, while he had been walking in the gardens and afterwards
waiting in an outer room of the pavilion with the servants, had been
making anew the digest of the evidence he would bring to prove his
identity and Tito's baseness, recalling the description and history of
his gems, and assuring himself by rapid mental glances that he could
attest his learning and his travels.  It might be partly owing to this
nervous strain that the new shock of rage he felt as Tito's lie fell on
his ears brought a strange bodily effect with it: a cold stream seemed
to rush over him, and the last words of the speech seemed to be drowned
by ringing chimes.  Thought gave way to a dizzy horror, as if the earth
were slipping away from under him.  Every one in the room was looking at
him as Tito ended, and saw that the eyes which had had such fierce
intensity only a few minutes before had now a vague fear in them.  He
clutched the back of a seat, and was silent.

Hardly any evidence could have been more in favour of Tito's assertion.

"Surely I have seen this man before, somewhere," said Tornabuoni.

"Certainly you have," said Tito, readily, in a low tone.  "He is the
escaped prisoner who clutched me on the steps of the Duomo.  I did not
recognise him then; he looks now more as he used to do, except that he
has a more unmistakable air of mad imbecility."

"I cast no doubt on your word, Melema," said Bernardo Rucellai, with
cautious gravity, "but you are right to desire some positive test of the
fact."  Then turning to Baldassarre, he said, "If you are the person you
claim to be, you can doubtless give some description of the gems which
were your property.  I myself was the purchaser of more than one gem
from Messer Tito--the chief rings, I believe, in his collection.  One of
them is a fine sard, engraved with a subject from Homer.  If, as you
allege, you are a scholar, and the rightful owner of that ring, you can
doubtless turn to the noted passage in Homer from which that subject is
taken.  Do you accept this test, Melema? or have you anything to allege
against its validity?  The Jacopo you speak of, was he a scholar?"

It was a fearful crisis for Tito.  If he said "Yes," his quick mind told
him that he would shake the credibility of his story: if he said "No,"
he risked everything on the uncertain extent of Baldassarre's
imbecility.  But there was no noticeable pause before he said, "No.  I
accept the test."

There was a dead silence while Rucellai moved towards the recess where
the books were, and came back with the fine Florentine Homer in his
hand.  Baldassarre, when he was addressed, had turned his head towards
the speaker, and Rucellai believed that he had understood him.  But he
chose to repeat what he had said, that there might be no mistake as to
the test.

"The ring I possess," he said, "is a fine sard, engraved with a subject
from Homer.  There was no other at all resembling it in Messer Tito's
collection.  Will you turn to the passage in Homer from which that
subject is taken?  Seat yourself here," he added, laying the book on the
table, and pointing to his own seat while he stood beside it.

Baldassarre had so far recovered from the first confused horror produced
by the sensation of rushing coldness and chiming din in the ears as to
be partly aware of what was said to him: he was aware that something was
being demanded from him to prove his identity, but he formed no distinct
idea of the details.  The sight of the book recalled the habitual
longing and faint hope that he could read and understand, and he moved
towards the chair immediately.

The book was open before him, and he bent his head a little towards it,
while everybody watched him eagerly.  He turned no leaf.  His eyes
wandered over the pages that lay before him, and then fixed on them a
straining gaze.  This lasted for two or three minutes in dead silence.
Then he lifted his hands to each side of his head, and said, in a low
tone of despair, "Lost, lost!"

There was something so piteous in the wandering look and the low cry,
that while they confirmed the belief in his madness they raised
compassion.  Nay, so distinct sometimes is the working of a double
consciousness within us, that Tito himself, while he triumphed in the
apparent verification of his lie, wished that he had never made the lie
necessary to himself--wished he had recognised his father on the steps--
wished he had gone to seek him--wished everything had been different.
But he had borrowed from the terrible usurer Falsehood, and the loan had
mounted and mounted with the years, till he belonged to the usurer, body
and soul.

The compassion excited in all the witnesses was not without its danger
to Tito; for conjecture is constantly guided by feeling, and more than
one person suddenly conceived that this man might have been a scholar
and have lost his faculties.  On the other hand, they had not present to
their minds the motives which could have led Tito to the denial of his
benefactor, and having no ill-will towards him, it would have been
difficult to them to believe that he had been uttering the basest of
lies.  And the originally common type of Baldassarre's person, coarsened
by years of hardship, told as a confirmation of Tito's lie.  If
Baldassarre, to begin with, could have uttered precisely the words he
had premeditated, there might have been something in the form of his
accusation which would have given it the stamp not only of true
experience but of mental refinement.  But there had been no such
testimony in his impulsive agitated words: and there seemed the very
opposite testimony in the rugged face and the coarse hands that trembled
beside it, standing out in strong contrast in the midst of that
velvet-clad, fair-handed company.

His next movement, while he was being watched in silence, told against
him too.  He took his hands from his head, and felt for something under
his tunic.  Every one guessed what that movement meant--guessed that
there was a weapon at his side.  Glances were interchanged; and Bernardo
Rucellai said, in a quiet tone, touching Baldassarre's shoulder--

"My friend, this is an important business of yours.  You shall have all
justice.  Follow me into a private room."

Baldassarre was still in that half-stunned state in which he was
susceptible to any prompting, in the same way as an insect that forms no
conception of what the prompting leads to.  He rose from his seat, and
followed Rucellai out of the room.

In two or three minutes Rucellai came back again, and said--

"He is safe under lock and key.  Piero Pitti, you are one of the
Magnificent Eight, what do you think of our sending Matteo to the palace
for a couple of sbirri, who may escort him to the Stinche?  [The largest
prison in Florence.]  If there is any danger in him, as I think there
is, he will be safe there; and we can inquire about him to-morrow."

Pitti assented, and the order was given.

"He is certainly an ill-looking fellow," said Tornabuoni.  "And you say
he has attempted your life already, Melema?"

And the talk turned on the various forms of madness, and the fierceness
of the southern blood.  If the seeds of conjecture unfavourable to Tito
had been planted in the mind of any one present, they were hardly strong
enough to grow without the aid of much daylight and ill-will.  The
common-looking, wild-eyed old man, clad in serge, might have won belief
without very strong evidence, if he had accused a man who was envied and
disliked.  As it was, the only congruous and probable view of the case
seemed to be the one that sent the unpleasant accuser safely out of
sight, and left the pleasant serviceable Tito just where he was before.

The subject gradually floated away, and gave place to others, till a
heavy tramp, and something like the struggling of a man who was being
dragged away, were heard outside.  The sounds soon died out, and the
interruption seemed to make the last hour's conviviality more resolute
and vigorous.  Every one was willing to forget a disagreeable incident.

Tito's heart was palpitating, and the wine tasted no better to him than
if it had been blood.

To-night he had paid a heavier price than ever to make himself safe.  He
did not like the price, and yet it was inevitable that he should be glad
of the purchase.

And after all he led the chorus.  He was in a state of excitement in
which oppressive sensations, and the wretched consciousness of something
hateful but irrevocable, were mingled with a feeling of triumph which
seemed to assert itself as the feeling that would subsist and be master
of the morrow.

And it _was_ master.  For on the morrow, as we saw, when he was about to
start on his mission to Rome, he had the air of a man well satisfied
with the world.



CHAPTER FORTY.

AN ARRESTING VOICE.

When Romola sat down on the stone under the cypress, all things
conspired to give her the sense of freedom and solitude: her escape from
the accustomed walls and streets; the widening distance from her
husband, who was by this time riding towards Siena, while every hour
would take her farther on the opposite way; the morning stillness; the
great dip of ground on the roadside making a gulf between her and the
sombre calm of the mountains.  For the first time in her life she felt
alone in the presence of the earth and sky, with no human presence
interposing and making a law for her.

Suddenly a voice close to her said--

"You are Romola de' Bardi, the wife of Tito Melema."

She knew the voice: it had vibrated through her more than once before;
and because she knew it, she did not turn round or look up.  She sat
shaken by awe, and yet inwardly rebelling against the awe.  It was one
of those black-skirted monks who was daring to speak to her, and
interfere with her privacy: that was all.  And yet she was shaken, as if
that destiny which men thought of as a sceptred deity had come to her,
and grasped her with fingers of flesh.

"You are fleeing from Florence in disguise.  I have a command from God
to stop you.  You are not permitted to flee."

Romola's anger at the intrusion mounted higher at these imperative
words.  She would not turn round to look at the speaker, whose examining
gaze she resented.  Sitting quite motionless, she said--

"What right have you to speak to me, or to hinder me?"

"The right of a messenger.  You have put on a religious garb, and you
have no religious purpose.  You have sought the garb as a disguise.  But
you were not suffered to pass me without being discerned.  It was
declared to me who you were: it is declared to me that you are seeking
to escape from the lot God has laid upon you.  You wish your true name
and your true place in life to be hidden, that you may choose for
yourself a new name and a new place, and have no rule but your own will.
And I have a command to call you back.  My daughter, you must return to
your place."

Romola's mind rose in stronger rebellion with every sentence.  She was
the more determined not to show any sign of submission, because the
consciousness of being inwardly shaken made her dread lest she should
fall into irresolution.  She spoke with more irritation than before.

"I will not return.  I acknowledge no right of priests and monks to
interfere with my actions.  You have no power over me."

"I know--I know you have been brought up in scorn of obedience.  But it
is not the poor monk who claims to interfere with you: it is the truth
that commands you.  And you cannot escape it.  Either you must obey it,
and it will lead you; or you must disobey it, and it will hang on you
with the weight of a chain which you will drag for ever.  But you will
obey it, my daughter.  Your old servant will return to you with the
mules; my companion is gone to fetch him; and you will go back to
Florence."

She started up with anger in her eyes, and faced the speaker.  It was
Fra Girolamo: she knew that well enough before.  She was nearly as tall
as he was, and their faces were almost on a level.  She had started up
with defiant words ready to burst from her lips, but they fell back
again without utterance.  She had met Fra Girolamo's calm glance, and
the impression from it was so new to her, that her anger sank ashamed as
something irrelevant.

There was nothing transcendent in Savonarola's face.  It was not
beautiful.  It was strong-featured, and owed all its refinement to
habits of mind and rigid discipline of the body.  The source of the
impression his glance produced on Romola was the sense it conveyed to
her of interest in her and care for her apart from any personal feeling.
It was the first time she had encountered a gaze in which simple human
fellowship expressed itself as a strongly-felt bond.  Such a glance is
half the vocation of the priest or spiritual guide of men, and Romola
felt it impossible again to question his authority to speak to her.  She
stood silent, looking at him.  And he spoke again.

"You assert your freedom proudly, my daughter.  But who is so base as
the debtor that thinks himself free?"

There was a sting in those words, and Romola's countenance changed as if
a subtle pale flash had gone over it.

"And you are flying from your debts: the debt of a Florentine woman; the
debt of a wife.  You are turning your back on the lot that has been
appointed for you--you are going to choose another.  But can man or
woman choose duties?  No more than they can choose their birthplace or
their father and mother.  My daughter, you are fleeing from the presence
of God into the wilderness."

As the anger melted from Romola's mind, it had given place to a new
presentiment of the strength there might be in submission, if this man,
at whom she was beginning to look with a vague reverence, had some valid
law to show her.  But no--it was impossible; he could not know what
determined her.  Yet she could not again simply refuse to be guided; she
was constrained to plead; and in her new need to be reverent while she
resisted, the title which she had never given him before came to her
lips without forethought, "My father, you cannot know the reasons which
compel me to go.  None can know them but myself.  None can judge for me.
I have been driven by great sorrow.  I am resolved to go."

"I know enough, my daughter: my mind has been so far illuminated
concerning you, that I know enough.  You are not happy in your married
life; but I am not a confessor, and I seek to know nothing that should
be reserved for the seal of confession.  I have a divine warrant to stop
you, which does not depend on such knowledge.  You were warned by a
message from heaven, delivered in my presence--you were warned before
marriage, when you might still have lawfully chosen to be free from the
marriage-bond.  But you chose the bond; and in wilfully breaking it--I
speak to you as a pagan, if the holy mystery of matrimony is not sacred
to you--you are breaking a pledge.  Of what wrongs will you complain, my
daughter, when you yourself are committing one of the greatest wrongs a
woman and a citizen can be guilty of--withdrawing in secrecy and
disguise from a pledge which you have given in the face of God and your
fellow-men?  Of what wrongs will you complain, when you yourself are
breaking the simplest law that lies at the foundation of the trust which
binds man to man--faithfulness to the spoken word?  This, then, is the
wisdom you have gained by scorning the mysteries of the Church?--not to
see the bare duty of integrity, where the Church would have taught you
to see, not integrity only, but religion."

The blood had rushed to Romola's face, and she shrank as if she had been
stricken.  "I would not have put on a disguise," she began; but she
could not go on,--she was too much shaken by the suggestion in the
Frate's words of a possible affinity between her own conduct and Tito's.

"And to break that pledge you fly from Florence: Florence, where there
are the only men and women in the world to whom you owe the debt of a
fellow-citizen."

"I should never have quitted Florence," said Romola, tremulously, "as
long as there was any hope of my fulfilling a duty to my father there."

"And do you own no tie but that of a child to her father in the flesh?
Your life has been spent in blindness, my daughter.  You have lived with
those who sit on a hill aloof, and look down on the life of their
fellow-men.  I know their vain discourse.  It is of what has been in the
times which they fill with their own fancied wisdom, while they scorn
God's work in the present.  And doubtless you were taught how there were
pagan women who felt what it was to live for the Republic; yet you have
never felt that you, a Florentine woman, should live for Florence.  If
your own people are wearing a yoke, will you slip from under it, instead
of struggling with them to lighten it?  There is hunger and misery in
our streets, yet you say, `I care not; I have my own sorrows; I will go
away, if peradventure I can ease them.'  The servants of God are
struggling after a law of justice, peace, and charity, that the hundred
thousand citizens among whom you were born may be governed righteously;
but you think no more of this than if you were a bird, that may spread
its wings and fly whither it will in search of food to its liking.  And
yet you have scorned the teaching of the Church, my daughter.  As if
you, a wilful wanderer, following your own blind choice, were not below
the humblest Florentine woman who stretches forth her hands with her own
people, and craves a blessing for them; and feels a close sisterhood
with the neighbour who kneels beside her and is not of her own blood;
and thinks of the mighty purpose that God has for Florence; and waits
and endures because the promised work is great, and she feels herself
little."

"I was not going away to ease and self-indulgence," said Romola, raising
her head again, with a prompting to vindicate herself.  "I was going
away to hardship.  I expect no joy: it is gone from my life."

"You are seeking your own will, my daughter.  You are seeking some good
other than the law you are bound to obey.  But how will you find good?
It is not a thing of choice: it is a river that flows from the foot of
the Invisible Throne, and flows by the path of obedience.  I say again,
man cannot choose his duties.  You may choose to forsake your duties,
and choose not to have the sorrow they bring.  But you will go forth;
and what will you find, my daughter?  Sorrow without duty--bitter herbs,
and no bread with them."

"But if you knew," said Romola, clasping her hands and pressing them
tight, as she looked pleadingly at Fra Girolamo; "if you knew what it
was to me--how impossible it seemed to me to bear it."

"My daughter," he said, pointing to the cord round Romola's neck, "you
carry something within your mantle; draw it forth, and look at it."

Romola gave a slight start, but her impulse now was to do just what
Savonarola told her.  Her self-doubt was grappled by a stronger will and
a stronger conviction than her own.  She drew forth the crucifix.  Still
pointing towards it, he said--

"There, my daughter, is the image of a Supreme Offering, made by Supreme
Love, because the need of man was great."

He paused, and she held the crucifix trembling--trembling under a sudden
impression of the wide distance between her present and her past self.
What a length of road she had travelled through since she first took
that crucifix from the Frate's hands!  Had life as many secrets before
her still as it had for her then, in her young blindness?  It was a
thought that helped all other subduing influences; and at the sound of
Fra Girolamo's voice again, Romola, with a quick involuntary movement,
pressed the crucifix against her mantle and looked at him with more
submission than before.

"Conform your life to that image, my daughter; make your sorrow an
offering: and when the fire of Divine charity burns within you, and you
behold the need of your fellow-men by the light of that flame, you will
not call your offering great.  You have carried yourself proudly, as one
who held herself not of common blood or of common thoughts; but you have
been as one unborn to the true life of man.  What! you say your love for
your father no longer tells you to stay in Florence?  Then, since that
tie is snapped, you are without a law, without religion: you are no
better than a beast of the field when she is robbed of her young.  If
the yearning of a fleshly love is gone, you are without love, without
obligation.  See, then, my daughter, how you are below the life of the
believer who worships that image of the Supreme Offering, and feels the
glow of a common life with the lost multitude for whom that offering was
made, and beholds the history of the world as the history of a great
redemption in which he is himself a fellow-worker, in his own place and
among his own people!  If you held that faith, my beloved daughter, you
would not be a wanderer flying from suffering, and blindly seeking the
good of a freedom which is lawlessness.  You would feel that Florence
was the home of your soul as well as your birthplace, because you would
see the work that was given you to do there.  If you forsake your place,
who will fill it?  You ought to be in your place now, helping in the
great work by which God will purify Florence, and raise it to be the
guide of the nations.  What! the earth is full of iniquity--full of
groans--the light is still struggling with a mighty darkness, and you
say, `I cannot bear my bonds; I will burst them asunder; I will go where
no man claims me'?  My daughter, every bond of your life is a debt: the
right lies in the payment of that debt; it can lie nowhere else.  In
vain will you wander over the earth; you will be wandering for ever away
from the right."

Romola was inwardly struggling with strong forces: that immense personal
influence of Savonarola, which came from the energy of his emotions and
beliefs: and her consciousness, surmounting all prejudice, that his
words implied a higher law than any she had yet obeyed.  But the
resisting thoughts were not yet overborne.

"How, then, could Dino be right?  He broke ties.  He forsook his place."

"That was a special vocation.  He was constrained to depart, else he
could not have attained the higher life.  It would have been stifled
within him."

"And I too," said Romola, raising her hands to her brow, and speaking in
a tone of anguish, as if she were being dragged to some torture.
"Father, you may be wrong."

"Ask your conscience, my daughter.  You have no vocation such as your
brother had.  You are a wife.  You seek to break your ties in self-will
and anger, not because the higher life calls upon you to renounce them.
The higher life begins for us, my daughter, when we renounce our own
will to bow before a Divine law.  That seems hard to you.  It is the
portal of wisdom, and freedom, and blessedness.  And the symbol of it
hangs before you.  That wisdom is the religion of the Cross.  And you
stand aloof from it: you are a pagan; you have been taught to say, `I am
as the wise men who lived before the time when the Jew of Nazareth was
crucified.'  And that is your wisdom!  To be as the dead whose eyes are
closed, and whose ear is deaf to the work of God that has been since
their time.  What has your dead wisdom done for you, my daughter?  It
has left you without a heart for the neighbours among whom you dwell,
without care for the great work by which Florence is to be regenerated
and the world made holy; it has left you without a share in the Divine
life which quenches the sense of suffering Self in the ardours of an
ever-growing love.  And now, when the sword has pierced your soul, you
say, `I will go away; I cannot bear my sorrow.'  And you think nothing
of the sorrow and the wrong that are within the walls of the city where
you dwell: you would leave your place empty, when it ought to be filled
with your pity and your labour.  If there is wickedness in the streets,
your steps should shine with the light of purity; if there is a cry of
anguish, you, my daughter, because you know the meaning of the cry,
should be there to still it.  My beloved daughter, sorrow has come to
teach you a new worship: the sign of it hangs before you."

Romola's mind was still torn by conflict.  She foresaw that she should
obey Savonarola and go back: his words had come to her as if they were
an interpretation of that revulsion from self-satisfied ease, and of
that new fellowship with suffering, which had already been awakened in
her.  His arresting voice had brought a new condition into her life,
which made it seem impossible to her that she could go on her way as if
she had not heard it; yet she shrank as one who sees the path she must
take, but sees, too, that the hot lava lies there.  And the instinctive
shrinking from a return to her husband brought doubts.  She turned away
her eyes from Fra Girolamo, and stood for a minute or two with her hands
hanging clasped before her, like a statue.  At last she spoke, as if the
words were being wrung from her, still looking on the ground.

"My husband... he is not... my love is gone!"

"My daughter, there is the bond of a higher love.  Marriage is not
carnal only, made for selfish delight.  See what that thought leads you
to!  It leads you to wander away in a false garb from all the
obligations of your place and name.  That would not have been, if you
had learned that it is a sacramental vow, from which none but God can
release you.  My daughter, your life is not as a grain of sand, to be
blown by the winds; it is a thing of flesh and blood, that dies if it be
sundered.  Your husband is not a malefactor?"

Romola started.  "Heaven forbid!  No; I accuse him of nothing."

"I did not suppose he was a malefactor.  I meant, that if he were a
malefactor, your place would be in the prison beside him.  My daughter,
if the cross comes to you as a wife, you must carry it as a wife.  You
may say, `I will forsake my husband,' but you cannot cease to be a
wife."

"Yet if--oh, how could I bear--" Romola had involuntarily begun to say
something which she sought to banish from her mind again.

"Make your marriage-sorrows an offering too, my daughter: an offering to
the great work by which sin and sorrow are being made to cease.  The end
is sure, and is already beginning.  Here in Florence it is beginning,
and the eyes of faith behold it.  And it may be our blessedness to die
for it: to die daily by the crucifixion of our selfish will--to die at
last by laying our bodies on the altar.  My daughter, you are a child of
Florence; fulfil the duties of that great inheritance.  Live for
Florence--for your own people, whom God is preparing to bless the earth.
Bear the anguish and the smart.  The iron is sharp--I know, I know--it
rends the tender flesh.  The draught is bitterness on the lips.  But
there is rapture in the cup--there is the vision which makes all life
below it dross for ever.  Come, my daughter, come back to your place!"

While Savonarola spoke with growing intensity, his arms tightly folded
before him still, as they had been from the first, but his face alight
as from an inward flame, Romola felt herself surrounded and possessed by
the glow of his passionate faith.  The chill doubts all melted away; she
was subdued by the sense of something unspeakably great to which she was
being called by a strong being who roused a new strength within herself.
In a voice that was like a low, prayerful cry, she said--

"Father, I will be guided.  Teach me!  I will go back."

Almost unconsciously she sank on her knees.  Savonarola stretched out
his hands over her; but feeling would no longer pass through the channel
of speech, and he was silent.



CHAPTER FORTY ONE.

COMING BACK.

"Rise, my daughter," said Fra Girolamo at last.  "Your servant is
waiting not far off with the mules.  It is time that I should go onward
to Florence."

Romola arose from her knees.  That silent attitude had been a sort of
sacrament to her, confirming the state of yearning passivity on which
she had newly entered.  By the one act of renouncing her resolve to quit
her husband, her will seemed so utterly bruised that she felt the need
of direction even in small things.  She lifted up the edge of her cowl,
and saw Maso and the second Dominican standing with their backs towards
her on the edge of the hill about ten yards from her; but she looked at
Savonarola again without speaking, as if the order to Maso to turn back
must come from him and not from her.

"I will go and call them," he said, answering her glance of appeal; "and
I will recommend you, my daughter, to the Brother who is with me.  You
desire to put yourself under guidance, and to learn that wisdom which
has been hitherto as foolishness to you.  A chief gate of that wisdom is
the sacrament of confession.  You will need a confessor, my daughter,
and I desire to put you under the care of Fra Salvestro, one of the
brethren of San Marco, in whom I most confide."

"I would rather have no guidance but yours, father," said Romola,
looking anxious.

"My daughter, I do not act as a confessor.  The vocation I have
withdraws me from offices that would force me into frequent contact with
the laity, and interfere with my special duties."

"Then shall I not be able to speak to you in private? if I waver, if--"
Romola broke off from rising agitation.  She felt a sudden alarm lest
her new strength in renunciation should vanish if the immediate personal
influence of Savonarola vanished.

"My daughter, if your soul has need of the word in private from my lips,
you will let me know it through Fra Salvestro, and I will see you in the
sacristy or in the choir of San Marco.  And I will not cease to watch
over you.  I will instruct my brother concerning you, that he may guide
you into that path of labour for the suffering and the hungry to which
you are called as a daughter of Florence in these times of hard need.  I
desire to behold you among the feebler and more ignorant sisters as the
apple-tree among the trees of the forest, so that your fairness and all
natural gifts may be but as a lamp through which the Divine light shines
the more purely.  I will go now and call your servant."

When Maso had been sent a little way in advance, Fra Salvestro came
forward, and Savonarola led Romola towards him.  She had beforehand felt
an inward shrinking from a new guide who was a total stranger to her:
but to have resisted Savonarola's advice would have been to assume an
attitude of independence at a moment when all her strength must be drawn
from the renunciation of independence.  And the whole bent of her mind
now was towards doing what was painful rather than what was easy.  She
bowed reverently to Fra Salvestro before looking directly at him; but
when she raised her head and saw him fully, her reluctance became a
palpitating doubt.  There are men whose presence infuses trust and
reverence; there are others to whom we have need to carry our trust and
reverence ready-made; and that difference flashed on Romola as she
ceased to have Savonarola before her, and saw in his stead Fra Salvestro
Maruffi.  It was not that there was anything manifestly repulsive in Fra
Salvestro's face and manner, any air of hypocrisy, any tinge of
coarseness; his face was handsomer than Fra Girolamo's, his person a
little taller.  He was the long-accepted confessor of many among the
chief personages in Florence, and had therefore had large experience as
a spiritual director.  But his face had the vacillating expression of a
mind unable to concentrate itself strongly in the channel of one great
emotion or belief--an expression which is fatal to influence over an
ardent nature like Romola's.  Such an expression is not the stamp of
insincerity; it is the stamp simply of a shallow soul, which will often
be found sincerely striving to fill a high vocation, sincerely composing
its countenance to the utterance of sublime formulas, but finding the
muscles twitch or relax in spite of belief, as prose insists on coming
instead of poetry to the man who has not the divine frenzy.  Fra
Salvestro had a peculiar liability to visions, dependent apparently on a
constitution given to somnambulism.  Savonarola believed in the
supernatural character of these visions, while Fra Salvestro himself had
originally resisted such an interpretation of them, and had even rebuked
Savonarola for his prophetic preaching: another proof, if one were
wanted, that the relative greatness of men is not to be gauged by their
tendency to disbelieve the superstitions of their age.  For of these two
there can be no question which was the great man and which the small.

The difference between them was measured very accurately by the change
in Romola's feeling as Fra Salvestro began to address her in words of
exhortation and encouragement.  After her first angry resistance of
Savonarola had passed away, she had lost all remembrance of the old
dread lest any influence should drag her within the circle of fanaticism
and sour monkish piety.  But now again, the chill breath of that dread
stole over her.  It could have no decisive effect against the impetus
her mind had just received; it was only like the closing of the grey
clouds over the sunrise, which made her returning path monotonous and
sombre.

And perhaps of all sombre paths that on which we go back after treading
it with a strong resolution is the one that most severely tests the
fervour of renunciation.  As they re-entered the city gates the light
snow-flakes fell about them; and as the grey sister walked hastily
homeward from the Piazza di San Marco, and trod the bridge again, and
turned in at the large door in the Via de' Bardi, her footsteps were
marked darkly on the thin carpet of snow, and her cowl fell laden and
damp about her face.

She went up to her room, threw off her serge, destroyed the parting
letters, replaced all her precious trifles, unbound her hair, and put on
her usual black dress.  Instead of taking a long exciting journey, she
was to sit down in her usual place.  The snow fell against the windows,
and she was alone.

She felt the dreariness, yet her courage was high, like that of a seeker
who has come on new signs of gold.  She was going to thread life by a
fresh clue.  She had thrown all the energy of her will into
renunciation.  The empty tabernacle remained locked, and she placed
Dino's crucifix outside it.

Nothing broke the outward monotony of her solitary home, till the night
came like a white ghost at the windows.  Yet it was the most memorable
Christmas-eve in her life to Romola, this of 1494.



PART THREE.



CHAPTER FORTY TWO.

ROMOLA IN HER PLACE.

It was the thirtieth of October 1496.  The sky that morning was clear
enough, and there was a pleasant autumnal breeze.  But the Florentines
just then thought very little about the land breezes: they were thinking
of the gales at sea, which seemed to be uniting with all other powers to
disprove the Frate's declaration that Heaven took special care of
Florence.

For those terrible gales had driven away from the coast of Leghorn
certain ships from Marseilles, freighted with soldiery and corn; and
Florence was in the direst need, first of food, and secondly of fighting
men.  Pale Famine was in her streets, and her territory was threatened
on all its borders.

For the French king, that new Charlemagne, who had entered Italy in
anticipatory triumph, and had conquered Naples without the least
trouble, had gone away again fifteen months ago, and was even, it was
feared, in his grief for the loss of a new-born son, losing the languid
intention of coming back again to redress grievances and set the Church
in order.  A league had been formed against him--a Holy League, with
Pope Borgia at its head--to "drive out the barbarians," who still
garrisoned the fortress of Naples.  That had a patriotic sound; but,
looked at more closely, the Holy League seemed very much like an
agreement among certain wolves to drive away all other wolves, and then
to see which among themselves could snatch the largest share of the
prey.  And there was a general disposition to regard Florence not as a
fellow-wolf, but rather as a desirable carcass.  Florence, therefore, of
all the chief Italian States, had alone declined to join the League,
adhering still to the French alliance.

She had declined at her peril.  At this moment Pisa, still fighting
savagely for liberty, was being encouraged not only by strong forces
from Venice and Milan, but by the presence of the German Emperor
Maximilian, who had been invited by the League, and was joining the
Pisans with such troops as he had in the attempt to get possession of
Leghorn, while the coast was invested by Venetian and Genoese ships.
And if Leghorn should fall into the hands of the enemy, woe to Florence!
For if that one outlet towards the sea were closed, hedged in as she
was on the land by the bitter ill-will of the Pope and the jealousy of
smaller States, how could succours reach her?

The government of Florence had shown a great heart in this urgent need,
meeting losses and defeats with vigorous effort, raising fresh money,
raising fresh soldiers, but not neglecting the good old method of
Italian defence--conciliatory embassies.  And while the scarcity of food
was every day becoming greater, they had resolved, in opposition to old
precedent, not to shut out the starving country people, and the
mendicants driven from the gates of other cities, who came flocking to
Florence like birds from a land of snow.

These acts of a government in which the disciples of Savonarola made the
strongest element were not allowed to pass without criticism.  The
disaffected were plentiful, and they saw clearly that the government
took the worst course for the public welfare.  Florence ought to join
the League and make common cause with the other great Italian States,
instead of drawing down their hostility by a futile adherence to a
foreign ally.  Florence ought to take care of her own citizens, instead
of opening her gates to famine and pestilence in the shape of starving
contadini and alien mendicants.

Every day the distress became sharper: every day the murmurs became
louder.  And, to crown the difficulties of the government, for a month
and more--in obedience to a mandate from Rome--Fra Girolamo had ceased
to preach.  But on the arrival of the terrible news that the ships from
Marseilles had been driven back, and that no corn was coming, the need
for the voice that could infuse faith and patience into the people
became too imperative to be resisted.  In defiance of the Papal mandate
the Signoria requested Savonarola to preach.  And two days ago he had
mounted again the pulpit of the Duomo, and had told the people only to
wait and be steadfast and the divine help would certainly come.

It was a bold sermon: he consented to have his frock stripped off him
if, when Florence persevered in fulfilling the duties of piety and
citizenship, God did not come to her rescue.

Yet at present, on this morning of the thirtieth, there were no signs of
rescue.  Perhaps if the precious Tabernacle of the Madonna dell'
Impruneta were brought into Florence and carried in devout procession to
the Duomo, that Mother, rich in sorrows and therefore in mercy, would
plead for the suffering city?  For a century and a half there were
records how the Florentines, suffering from drought, or flood, or
famine, or pestilence, or the threat of wars, had fetched the potent
image within their walls, and had found deliverance.  And grateful
honour had been done to her and her ancient church of L'Impruneta; the
high house of Buondelmonti, patrons of the church, had to guard her
hidden image with bare sword; wealth had been poured out for prayers at
her shrine, for chantings, and chapels, and ever-burning lights; and
lands had been added, till there was much quarrelling for the privilege
of serving her.  The Florentines were deeply convinced of her
graciousness to them, so that the sight of her tabernacle within their
walls was like the parting of the cloud, and the proverb ran, that the
Florentines had a Madonna who would do what they pleased.

When were they in more need of her pleading pity than now?  And already,
the evening before, the tabernacle containing the miraculous hidden
image had been brought with high and reverend escort from L'Impruneta,
the privileged spot six miles beyond the gate of San Piero that looks
towards Rome, and had been deposited in the church of San Gaggio,
outside the gate, whence it was to be fetched in solemn procession by
all the fraternities, trades, and authorities of Florence.

But the Pitying Mother had not yet entered within the walls, and the
morning arose on unchanged misery and despondency.  Pestilence was
hovering in the track of famine.  Not only the hospitals were full, but
the courtyards of private houses had been turned into refuges and
infirmaries; and still there was unsheltered want.  And early this
morning, as usual, members of the various fraternities who made it part
of their duty to bury the unfriended dead, were bearing away the corpses
that had sunk by the wayside.  As usual, sweet womanly forms, with the
refined air and carriage of the well-born, but in the plainest garb,
were moving about the streets on their daily errands of tending the sick
and relieving the hungry.

One of these forms was easily distinguishable as Romola de' Bardi.  Clad
in the simplest garment of black serge, with a plain piece of black
drapery drawn over her head, so as to hide all her hair, except the
bands of gold that rippled apart on her brow, she was advancing from the
Ponte Vecchio towards the Por' Santa Maria--the street in a direct line
with the bridge--when she found her way obstructed by the pausing of a
bier, which was being carried by members of the company of San Jacopo
del Popolo, in search for the unburied dead.  The brethren at the head
of the bier were stooping to examine something, while a group of idle
workmen, with features paled and sharpened by hunger, were clustering
around and all talking at once.

"He's dead, I tell you!  Messer Domeneddio has loved him well enough to
take him."

"Ah, and it would be well for us all if we could have our legs stretched
out and go with our heads two or three _bracci_ foremost!  It's ill
standing upright with hunger to prop you."

"Well, well, he's an old fellow.  Death has got a poor bargain.  Life's
had the best of him."

"And no Florentine, ten to one!  A beggar turned out of Siena.  San
Giovanni defend us!  They've no need of soldiers to fight us.  They send
us an army of starving men."

"No, no!  This man is one of the prisoners turned out of the Stinche.  I
know by the grey patch where the prison badge was."

"Keep quiet!  Lend a hand!  Don't you see the brethren are going to lift
him on the bier?"

"It's likely he's alive enough if he could only look it.  The soul may
be inside him if it had only a drop of _vernaccia_ to warm it."

"In truth, I think he is not dead," said one of the brethren, when they
had lifted him on the bier.  "He has perhaps only sunk down for want of
food."

"Let me try to give him some wine," said Romola, coming forward.  She
loosened the small flask which she carried at her belt, and, leaning
towards the prostrate body, with a deft hand she applied a small ivory
implement between the teeth, and poured into the mouth a few drops of
wine.  The stimulus acted: the wine was evidently swallowed.  She poured
more, till the head was moved a little towards her, and the eyes of the
old man opened full upon her with the vague look of returning
consciousness.

Then for the first time a sense of complete recognition came over
Romola.  Those wild dark eyes opening in the sallow deep-lined face,
with the white beard, which was now long again, were like an
unmistakable signature to a remembered handwriting.  The light of two
summers had not made that image any fainter in Romola's memory: the
image of the escaped prisoner, whom she had seen in the Duomo the day
when Tito first wore the armour--at whose grasp Tito was paled with
terror in the strange sketch she had seen in Piero's studio.  A wretched
tremor and palpitation seized her.  Now at last, perhaps, she was going
to know some secret which might be more bitter than all that had gone
before.  She felt an impulse to dart away as from a sight of horror; and
again, a more imperious need to keep close by the side of this old man
whom, the divination of keen feeling told her, her husband had injured.
In the very instant of this conflict she still leaned towards him and
kept her right-hand ready to administer more wine, while her left was
passed under his neck.  Her hands trembled, but their habit of soothing
helpfulness would have served to guide them without the direction of her
thought.

Baldassarre was looking at _her_ for the first time.  The close
seclusion in which Romola's trouble had kept her in the weeks preceding
her flight and his arrest, had denied him the opportunity he had sought
of seeing the Wife who lived in the Via de' Bardi: and at this moment
the descriptions he had heard of the fair golden-haired woman were all
gone, like yesterday's waves.

"Will it not be well to carry him to the steps of San Stefano?" said
Romola.  "We shall cease then to stop up the street, and you can go on
your way with your bier."

They had only to move onward for about thirty yards before reaching the
steps of San Stefano, and by this time Baldassarre was able himself to
make some efforts towards getting off the bier, and propping himself on
the steps against the church-doorway.  The charitable brethren passed
on, but the group of interested spectators, who had nothing to do and
much to say, had considerably increased.  The feeling towards the old
man was not so entirely friendly now it was quite certain that he was
alive, but the respect inspired by Romola's presence caused the passing
remarks to be made in a rather more subdued tone than before.

"Ah, they gave him his morsel every day in the Stinche--that's why he
can't do so well without it.  You and I, Cecco, know better what it is
to go to bed fasting."

"_Gnaffe_! that's why the Magnificent Eight have turned out some of the
prisoners, that they may shelter honest people instead.  But if every
thief is to be brought to life with good wine and wheaten bread, we
Ciompi had better go and fill ourselves in Arno while the water's
plenty."

Romola had seated herself on the steps by Baldassarre, and was saying,
"Can you eat a little bread now? perhaps by-and-by you will be able, if
I leave it with you.  I must go on, because I have promised to be at the
hospital.  But I will come back if you will wait here, and then I will
take you to some shelter.  Do you understand?  Will you wait?  I will
come back."

He looked dreamily at her, and repeated her words, "come back."  It was
no wonder that his mind was enfeebled by his bodily exhaustion, but she
hoped that he apprehended her meaning.  She opened her basket, which was
filled with pieces of soft bread, and put one of the pieces into his
hand.

"Do you keep your bread for those that can't swallow, madonna?" said a
rough-looking fellow, in a red night-cap, who had elbowed his way into
the inmost circle of spectators--a circle that was pressing rather
closely on Romola.

"If anybody isn't hungry," said another, "I say, let him alone.  He's
better off than people who've got craving stomachs and no breakfast."

"Yes, indeed; if a man's a mind to die, it's a time to encourage him,
instead of making him come back to life against his will.  Dead men want
no trencher."

"Oh, you don't understand the Frate's charity," said a young man in an
excellent cloth tunic, whose face showed no signs of want.  "The Frate
has been preaching to the birds, like Saint Anthony, and he's been
telling the hawks they were made to feed the sparrows, as every good
Florentine citizen was made to feed six starving beggar-men from Arezzo
or Bologna.  Madonna, there, is a pious Piagnone: she's not going to
throw away her good bread on honest citizens who've got all the Frate's
prophecies to swallow."

"Come, madonna," said he of the red cap, "the old thief doesn't eat the
bread, you see: you'd better try _us_.  We fast so much, we're half
saints already."

The circle had narrowed till the coarse men--most of them gaunt from
privation--had left hardly any margin round Romola.  She had been taking
from her basket a small horn-cup, into which she put the piece of bread
and just moistened it with wine; and hitherto she had not appeared to
heed them.  But now she rose to her feet, and looked round at them.
Instinctively the men who were nearest to her pushed backward a little,
as if their rude nearness were the fault of those behind.  Romola held
out the basket of bread to the man in the night-cap, looking at him
without any reproach in her glance, as she said--

"Hunger is hard to bear, I know, and you have the power to take this
bread if you will.  It was saved for sick women and children.  You are
strong men; but if you do not choose to suffer because you are strong,
you have the power to take everything from the weak.  You can take the
bread from this basket; but I shall watch by this old man; I shall
resist your taking the bread from _him_."

For a few moments there was perfect silence, while Romola looked at the
faces before her, and held out the basket of bread.  Her own pale face
had the slightly pinched look and the deepening of the eye-socket which
indicate unusual fasting in the habitually temperate, and the large
direct gaze of her hazel eyes was all the more impressive.

The man in the night-cap looked rather silly, and backed, thrusting his
elbow into his neighbour's ribs with an air of moral rebuke.  The
backing was general, every one wishing to imply that he had been pushed
forward against his will; and the young man in the fine cloth tunic had
disappeared.

But at this moment the armed servitors of the Signoria, who had begun to
patrol the line of streets through which the procession was to pass,
came up to disperse the group which was obstructing the narrow street.
The man addressed as Cecco retreated from a threatening mace up the
church-steps, and said to Romola, in a respectful tone--

"Madonna, if you want to go on your errands, I'll take care of the old
man."

Cecco was a wild-looking figure: a very ragged tunic, made shaggy and
variegated by cloth-dust and clinging fragments of wool, gave relief to
a pair of bare bony arms and a long sinewy neck; his square jaw shaded
by a bristly black beard, his bridgeless nose and low forehead, made his
face look as if it had been crushed down for purposes of packing, and a
narrow piece of red rag tied over his ears seemed to assist in the
compression.  Romola looked at him with some hesitation.

"Don't distrust me, madonna," said Cecco, who understood her look
perfectly; "I am not so pretty as you, but I've got an old mother who
eats my porridge for me.  What! there's a heart inside me, and I've
bought a candle for the most Holy Virgin before now.  Besides, see
there, the old fellow is eating his sop.  He's hale enough: he'll be on
his legs as well as the best of us by-and-by."

"Thank you for offering to take care of him, friend," said Romola,
rather penitent for her doubting glance.  Then leaning to Baldassarre,
she said, "Pray wait for me till I come again."

He assented with a slight movement of the head and hand, and Romola went
on her way towards the hospital of San Matteo, in the Piazza di San
Marco.



CHAPTER FORTY THREE.

THE UNSEEN MADONNA.

In returning from the hospital, more than an hour later, Romola took a
different road, making a wider circuit towards the river, which she
reached at some distance from the Ponte Vecchio.  She turned her steps
towards that bridge, intending to hasten to San Stefano in search of
Baldassarre.  She dreaded to know more about him, yet she felt as if, in
forsaking him, she would be forsaking some near claim upon her.

But when she approached the meeting of the roads where the Por' Santa
Maria would be on her right-hand and the Ponte Vecchio on her left, she
found herself involved in a crowd who suddenly fell on their knees; and
she immediately knelt with them.  The Cross was passing--the Great Cross
of the Duomo--which headed the procession.  Romola was later than she
had expected to be, and now she must wait till the procession had
passed.  As she rose from her knees, when the Cross had disappeared, the
return to a standing posture, with nothing to do but gaze, made her more
conscious of her fatigue than she had been while she had been walking
and occupied.  A shopkeeper by her side said--

"Madonna Romola, you will be weary of standing: Gian Fantoni will be
glad to give you a seat in his house.  Here is his door close, at hand.
Let me open it for you.  What! he loves God and the Frate as we do.  His
house is yours."

Romola was accustomed now to be addressed in this fraternal way by
ordinary citizens, whose faces were familiar to her from her having seen
them constantly in the Duomo.  The idea of home had come to be
identified for her less with the house in the Via de' Bardi, where she
sat in frequent loneliness, than with the towered circuit of Florence,
where there was hardly a turn of the streets at which she was not
greeted with looks of appeal or of friendliness.  She was glad enough to
pass through the open door on her right-hand and be led by the fraternal
hose-vendor to an upstairs-window, where a stout woman with three
children, all in the plain garb of Piagnoni, made a place for her with
much reverence above the bright hanging draperies.  From this corner
station she could see, not only the procession pouring in solemn
slowness between the lines of houses on the Ponto Vecchio, but also the
river and the Lung' Arno on towards the bridge of the Santa Trinita.

In sadness and in stillness came the slow procession.  Not even a
wailing chant broke the silent appeal for mercy: there was only the
tramp of footsteps, and the faint sweep of woollen garments.  They were
young footsteps that were passing when Romola first looked from the
window--a long train of the Florentine youth, bearing high in the midst
of them the white image of the youthful Jesus, with a golden glory above
his head, standing by the tall cross where the thorns and the nails lay
ready.

After that train of fresh beardless faces came the mysterious-looking
Companies of Discipline, bound by secret rules to self-chastisement, and
devout praise, and special acts of piety; all wearing a garb which
concealed the whole head and face except the eyes.  Every one knew that
these mysterious forms were Florentine citizens of various ranks, who
might be seen at ordinary times going about the business of the shop,
the counting-house, or the State; but no member now was discernible as
son, husband, or father.  They had dropped their personality, and walked
as symbols of a common vow.  Each company had its colour and its badge,
but the garb of all was a complete shroud, and left no expression but
that of fellowship.

In comparison with them, the multitude of monks seemed to be strongly
distinguished individuals, in spite of the common tonsure and the common
frock.  First came a white stream of reformed Benedictines; and then a
much longer stream of the Frati Minori, or Franciscans, in that age all
clad in grey, with the knotted cord round their waists, and some of them
with the _zoccoli_, or wooden sandals, below their bare feet;--perhaps
the most numerous order in Florence, owning many zealous members who
loved mankind and hated the Dominicans.  And after the grey came the
black of the Augustinians of San Spirito with more cultured human faces
above it--men who had inherited the library of Boccaccio, and had made
the most learned company in Florence when learning was rarer; then the
white over dark of the Carmelites; and then again the unmixed black of
the Servites, that famous Florentine order founded by seven merchants
who forsook their gains to adore the Divine Mother.

And now the hearts of all onlookers began to beat a little faster,
either with hatred or with love, for there was a stream of black and
white coming over the bridge--of black mantles over white scapularies;
and every one knew that the Dominicans were coming.  Those of Fiesole
passed first.  One black mantle parted by white after another, one
tonsured head after another, and still expectation was suspended.  They
were very coarse mantles, all of them, and many were threadbare, if not
ragged; for the Prior of San Marco had reduced the fraternities under
his rule to the strictest poverty and discipline.  But in the long line
of black and white there was at last singled out a mantle only a little
more worn than the rest, with a tonsured head above it which might not
have appeared supremely remarkable to a stranger who had not seen it on
bronze medals, with the sword of God as its obverse; or surrounded by an
armed guard on the way to the Duomo; or transfigured by the inward flame
of the orator as it looked round on a rapt multitude.

As the approach of Savonarola was discerned, none dared conspicuously to
break the stillness by a sound which would rise above the solemn tramp
of footsteps and the faint sweep of garments; nevertheless his ear, as
well as other ears, caught a mingled sound of slow hissing that longed
to be curses, and murmurs that longed to be blessings.  Perhaps it was
the sense that the hissing predominated which made two or three of his
disciples in the foreground of the crowd, at the meeting of the roads,
fall on their knees as if something divine were passing.  The movement
of silent homage spread: it went along the sides of the streets like a
subtle shock, leaving some unmoved, while it made the most bend the knee
and bow the head.  But the hatred, too, gathered a more intense
expression; and as Savonarola passed up the Por' Santa Maria, Romola
could see that some one at an upper window spat upon him.

Monks again--Frati Umiliati, or Humbled Brethren, from Ognissanti, with
a glorious tradition of being the earliest workers in the wool-trade;
and again more monks--Vallombrosan and other varieties of Benedictines,
reminding the instructed eye by niceties of form and colour that in ages
of abuse, long ago, reformers had arisen who had marked a change of
spirit by a change of garb; till at last the shaven crowns were at an
end, and there came the train of untonsured secular priests.

Then followed the twenty-one incorporated Arts of Florence in long
array, with their banners floating above them in proud declaration that
the bearers had their distinct functions, from the bakers of bread to
the judges and notaries.  And then all the secondary officers of State,
beginning with the less and going on to the greater, till the line of
secularities was broken by the Canons of the Duomo, carrying a sacred
relic--the very head, enclosed in silver, of San Zenobio, immortal
bishop of Florence, whose virtues were held to have saved the city
perhaps a thousand years before.

Here was the nucleus of the procession.  Behind the relic came the
archbishop in gorgeous cope, with canopy held above him; and after him
the mysterious hidden Image--hidden first by rich curtains of brocade
enclosing an outer painted tabernacle, but within this, by the more
ancient tabernacle which had never been opened in the memory of living
men, or the fathers of living men.  In that inner shrine was the image
of the Pitying Mother, found ages ago in the soil of L'Impruneta,
uttering a cry as the spade struck it.  Hitherto the unseen Image had
hardly ever been carried to the Duomo without having rich gifts borne
before it.  There was no reciting the list of precious offerings made by
emulous men and communities, especially of veils and curtains and
mantles.  But the richest of all these, it was said, had been given by a
poor abbess and her nuns, who, having no money to buy materials, wove a
mantle of gold brocade with their prayers, embroidered it and adorned it
with their prayers, and, finally, saw their work presented to the
Blessed Virgin in the great Piazza by two beautiful youths who spread
out white wings and vanished in the blue.

But to-day there were no gifts carried before the tabernacle: no
donations were to be given to-day except to the poor.  That had been the
advice of Fra Girolamo, whose preaching never insisted on gifts to the
invisible powers, but only on help to visible need; and altars had been
raised at various points in front of the churches, on which the
oblations for the poor were deposited.  Not even a torch was carried.
Surely the hidden Mother cared less for torches and brocade than for the
wail of the hungry people.  Florence was in extremity: she had done her
utmost, and could only wait for something divine that was not in her own
power.

The Frate in the torn mantle had said that help would certainly come,
and many of the faint-hearted were clinging more to their faith in the
Frate's word, than to their faith in the virtues of the unseen Image.
But there were not a few of the fierce-hearted who thought with secret
rejoicing that the Frate's word might be proved false.

Slowly the tabernacle moved forward, and knees were bent.  There was
profound stillness; for the train of priests and chaplains from
L'Impruneta stirred no passion in the onlookers.  The procession was
about to close with the Priors and the Gonfaloniere: the long train of
companies and symbols, which have their silent music and stir the mind
as a chorus stirs it, was passing out of sight, and now a faint yearning
hope was all that struggled with the accustomed despondency.

Romola, whose heart had been swelling, half with foreboding, half with
that enthusiasm of fellowship which the life of the last two years had
made as habitual to her as the consciousness of costume to a vain and
idle woman, gave a deep sigh, as at the end of some long mental tension,
and remained on her knees for very languor; when suddenly there flashed
from between the houses on to the distant bridge something
bright-coloured.  In the instant, Romola started up and stretched out
her arms, leaning from the window, while the black drapery fell from her
head, and the golden gleam of her hair and the flush in her face seemed
the effect of one illumination.  A shout arose in the same instant; the
last troops of the procession paused, and all faces were turned towards
the distant bridge.

But the bridge was passed now: the horseman was pressing at full gallop
along by the Arno; the sides of his bay horse, just streaked with foam,
looked all white from swiftness; his cap was flying loose by his red
becchetto, and he waved an olive-branch in his hand.  It was a
messenger--a messenger of good tidings!  The blessed olive-branch spoke
afar off.  But the impatient people could not wait.  They rushed to meet
the on-comer, and seized his horse's rein, pushing and trampling.

And now Romola could see that the horseman was her husband, who had been
sent to Pisa a few days before on a private embassy.  The recognition
brought no new flash of joy into her eyes.  She had checked her first
impulsive attitude of expectation; but her governing anxiety was still
to know what news of relief had come for Florence.

"Good news!"

"Best news!"

"News to be paid with hose!"  (_novelle da calze_) were the vague
answers with which Tito met the importunities of the crowd, until he had
succeeded in pushing on his horse to the spot at the meeting of the ways
where the Gonfaloniere and the Priors were awaiting him.  There he
paused, and, bowing low, said--

"Magnificent Signori!  I have to deliver to you the joyful news that the
galleys from France, laden with corn and men, have arrived safely in the
port of Leghorn, by favour of a strong wind, which kept the enemy's
fleet at a distance."

The words had no sooner left Tito's lips than they seemed to vibrate up
the streets.  A great shout rang through the air, and rushed along the
river; and then another, and another; and the shouts were heard
spreading along the line of the procession towards the Duomo; and then
there were fainter answering shouts, like the intermediate plash of
distant waves in a great lake whose waters obey one impulse.

For some minutes there was no attempt to speak further: the Signoria
themselves lifted up their caps, and stood bare-headed in the presence
of a rescue which had come from outside the limit of their own power--
from that region of trust and resignation which has been in all ages
called divine.

At last, as the signal was given to move forward, Tito said, with a
smile--

"I ought to say, that any hose to be bestowed by the Magnificent
Signoria in reward of these tidings are due, not to me, but to another
man who had ridden hard to bring them, and would have been here in my
place if his horse had not broken down just before he reached Signa.
Meo di Sasso will doubtless be here in an hour or two, and may all the
more justly claim the glory of the messenger, because he has had the
chief labour and has lost the chief delight."

It was a graceful way of putting a necessary statement, and after a word
of reply from the _Proposto_, or spokesman of the Signoria, this
dignified extremity of the procession passed on, and Tito turned his
horse's head to follow in its train, while the great bell of the Palazzo
Vecchio was already beginning to swing, and give a louder voice to the
people's joy in that moment, when Tito's attention had ceased to be
imperatively directed, it might have been expected that he would look
round and recognise Romola; but he was apparently engaged with his cap,
which, now the eager people were leading his horse, he was able to seize
and place on his head, while his right-hand was still encumbered by the
olive-branch.  He had a becoming air of lassitude after his exertions;
and Romola, instead of making any effort to be recognised by him, threw
her black drapery over her head again, and remained perfectly quiet.
Yet she felt almost sure that Tito had seen her; he had the power of
seeing everything without seeming to see it.



CHAPTER FORTY FOUR.

THE VISIBLE MADONNA.

The crowd had no sooner passed onward than Romola descended to the
street, and hastened to the steps of San Stefano.  Cecco had been
attracted with the rest towards the Piazza, and she found Baldassarre
standing alone against the church-door, with the horn-cup in his hand,
waiting for her.  There was a striking change in him: the blank, dreamy
glance of a half-returned consciousness had given place to a fierceness
which, as she advanced and spoke to him, flashed upon her as if she had
been its object.  It was the glance of caged fury that sees its prey
passing safe beyond the bars.

Romola started as the glance was turned on her, but her immediate
thought was that he had seen Tito.  And as she felt the look of hatred
grating on her, something like a hope arose that this man might be the
criminal, and that her husband might not have been guilty towards him.
If she could learn that now, by bringing Tito face to face with him, and
have her mind set at rest!

"If you will come with me," she said, "I can give you shelter and food
until you are quite rested and strong.  Will you come?"

"Yes," said Baldassarre, "I shall be glad to get my strength.  I want to
get my strength," he repeated, as if he were muttering to himself,
rather than speaking to her.

"Come!" she said, inviting him to walk by her side, and taking the way
by the Arno towards the Ponte Rubaconte as the more private road.

"I think you are not a Florentine," she said, presently, as they turned
on to the bridge.

He looked round at her without speaking.  His suspicious caution was
more strongly upon him than usual, just now that the fog of confusion
and oblivion was made denser by bodily feebleness.  But she was looking
at him too, and there was something in her gentle eyes which at last
compelled him to answer her.  But he answered cautiously--

"No, I am no Florentine; I am a lonely man."

She observed his reluctance to speak to her, and dared not question him
further, lest he should desire to quit her.  As she glanced at him from
time to time, her mind was busy with thoughts which quenched the faint
hope that there was nothing painful to be revealed about her husband.
If this old man had been in the wrong, where was the cause for dread and
secrecy!

They walked on in silence till they reached the entrance into the Via
de' Bardi, and Romola noticed that he turned and looked at her with a
sudden movement as if some shock had passed through him.  A few moments
after, she paused at the half-open door of the court and turned towards
him.

"Ah!" he said, not waiting for her to speak, "you are his wife."

"Whose wife?" said Romola.

It would have been impossible for Baldassarre to recall any name at that
moment.  The very force with which the image of Tito pressed upon him
seemed to expel any verbal sign.  He made no answer, but looked at her
with strange fixedness.

She opened the door wide and showed the court covered with straw, on
which lay four or five sick people, while some little children crawled
or sat on it at their ease--tiny pale creatures, biting straws and
gurgling.

"If you will come in," said Romola, tremulously, "I will find you a
comfortable place, and bring you some more food."

"No, I will not come in," said Baldassarre.  But he stood still,
arrested by the burden of impressions under which his mind was too
confused to choose a course.

"Can I do nothing for you?" said Romola.  "Let me give you some money
that you may buy food.  It will be more plentiful soon."

She had put her hand into her scarsella as she spoke, and held out her
palm with several _grossi_ in it.  She purposely offered him more than
she would have given to any other man in the same circumstances.  He
looked at the coins a little while, and then said--

"Yes, I will take them."

She poured the coins into his palm, and he grasped them tightly.

"Tell me," said Romola, almost beseechingly.  "What shall you--"

But Baldassarre had turned away from her, and was walking again towards
the bridge.  Passing from it, straight on up the Via del Fosso, he came
upon the shop of Niccolo Caparra, and turned towards it without a pause,
as if it had been the very object of his search.  Niccolo was at that
moment in procession with the armourers of Florence, and there was only
one apprentice in the shop.  But there were all sorts of weapons in
abundance hanging there, and Baldassarre's eyes discerned what he was
more hungry for than for bread.  Niccolo himself would probably have
refused to sell anything that might serve as a weapon to this man with
signs of the prison on him; but the apprentice, less observant and
scrupulous, took three _grossi_ for a sharp hunting-knife without any
hesitation.  It was a conveniently small weapon, which Baldassarre could
easily thrust within the breast of his tunic, and he walked on, feeling
stronger.  That sharp edge might give deadliness to the thrust of an
aged arm: at least it was a companion, it was a power in league with
him, even if it failed.  It would break against armour, but was the
armour sure to be always there?  In those long months while vengeance
had lain in prison, baseness had perhaps become forgetful and secure.
The knife had been bought with the traitor's own money.  That was just.
Before he took the money, he had felt what he should do with it--buy a
weapon.  Yes, and if possible, food too; food to nourish the arm that
would grasp the weapon, food to nourish the body which was the temple of
vengeance.  When he had had enough bread, he should be able to think and
act--to think first how he could hide himself, lest Tito should have him
dragged away again.

With that idea of hiding in his mind, Baldassarre turned up the
narrowest streets, bought himself some meat and bread, and sat down
under the first loggia to eat.  The bells that swung out louder and
louder peals of joy, laying hold of him and making him vibrate along
with all the air, seemed to him simply part of that strong world which
was against him.

Romola had watched Baldassarre until he had disappeared round the
turning into the Piazza de' Mozzi, half feeling that his departure was a
relief, half reproaching herself for not seeking with more decision to
know the truth about him, for not assuring herself whether there were
any guiltless misery in his lot which she was not helpless to relieve.
Yet what could she have done if the truth had proved to be the burden of
some painful secret about her husband, in addition to the anxieties that
already weighed upon her?  Surely a wife was permitted to desire
ignorance of a husband's wrong-doing, since she alone must not protest
and warn men against him.  But that thought stirred too many intricate
fibres of feeling to be pursued now in her weariness.  It was a time to
rejoice, since help had come to Florence; and she turned into the court
to tell the good news to her patients on their straw beds.

She closed the door after her, lest the bells should drown her voice,
and then throwing the black drapery from her head, that the women might
see her better, she stood in the midst and told them that corn was
coming, and that the bells were ringing for gladness at the news.  They
all sat up to listen, while the children trotted or crawled towards her,
and pulled her black skirts, as if they were impatient at being all that
long way off her face.  She yielded to them, weary as she was, and sat
down on the straw, while the little pale things peeped into her basket
and pulled her hair down, and the feeble voices around her said, "The
Holy Virgin be praised!"

"It was the procession!"

"The Mother of God has had pity on us!"

At last Romola rose from the heap of straw, too tired to try and smile
any longer, saying as she turned up the stone steps--

"I will come by-and-by, to bring you your dinner."

"Bless you, madonna! bless you!" said the faint chorus, in much the same
tone as that in which they had a few minutes before praised and thanked
the unseen Madonna.

Romola cared a great deal for that music.  She had no innate taste for
tending the sick and clothing the ragged, like some women to whom the
details of such work are welcome in themselves, simply as an occupation.
Her early training had kept her aloof from such womanly labours; and if
she had not brought to them the inspiration of her deepest feelings,
they would have been irksome to her.  But they had come to be the one
unshaken resting-place of her mind, the one narrow pathway on which the
light fell clear.  If the gulf between herself and Tito which only
gathered a more perceptible wideness from her attempts to bridge it by
submission, brought a doubt whether, after all, the bond to which she
had laboured to be true might not itself be false--if she came away from
her confessor, Fra Salvestro, or from some contact with the disciples of
Savonarola amongst whom she worshipped, with a sickening sense that
these people were miserably narrow, and with an almost impetuous
reaction towards her old contempt for their superstition--she found
herself recovering a firm footing in her works of womanly sympathy.
Whatever else made her doubt, the help she gave to her fellow-citizens
made her sure that Fra Girolamo had been right to call her back.
According to his unforgotten words, her place had not been empty: it had
been filled with her love and her labour.  Florence had had need of her,
and the more her own sorrow pressed upon her, the more gladness she felt
in the memories, stretching through the two long years, of hours and
moments in which she had lightened the burden of life to others.  All
that ardour of her nature which could no longer spend itself in the
woman's tenderness for father and husband, had transformed itself into
an enthusiasm of sympathy with the general life.  She had ceased to
think that her own lot could be happy--had ceased to think of happiness
at all: the one end of her life seemed to her to be the diminishing of
sorrow.

Her enthusiasm was continually stirred to fresh vigour by the influence
of Savonarola.  In spite of the wearisome visions and allegories from
which she recoiled in disgust when they came as stale repetitions from
other lips than his, her strong affinity for his passionate sympathy and
the splendour of his aims had lost none of its power.  His burning
indignation against the abuses and oppression that made the daily story
of the Church and of States had kindled the ready fire in her too.  His
special care for liberty and purity of government in Florence, with his
constant reference of this immediate object to the wider end of a
universal regeneration, had created in her a new consciousness of the
great drama of human existence in which her life was a part; and through
her daily helpful contact with the less fortunate of her fellow-citizens
this new consciousness became something stronger than a vague sentiment;
it grew into a more and more definite motive of self-denying practice.
She thought little about dogmas, and shrank from reflecting closely on
the Frate's prophecies of the immediate scourge and closely--following
regeneration.  She had submitted her mind to his and had entered into
communion with the Church, because in this way she had found an
immediate satisfaction for moral needs which all the previous culture
and experience of her life had left hungering.  Fra Girolamo's voice had
waked in her mind a reason for living, apart from personal enjoyment and
personal affection; but it was a reason that seemed to need feeding with
greater forces than she possessed within herself, and her submissive use
of all offices of the Church was simply a watching and waiting if by any
means fresh strength might come.  The pressing problem for Romola just
then was not to settle questions of controversy, but to keep alive that
flame of unselfish emotion by which a life of sadness might still be a
life of active love.

Her trust in Savonarola's nature as greater than her own made a large
part of the strength she had found.  And the trust was not to be lightly
shaken.  It is not force of intellect which causes ready repulsion from
the aberration and eccentricities of greatness, any more than it is
force of vision that causes the eye to explore the warts on a face
bright with human expression; it is simply the negation of high
sensibilities.  Romola was so deeply moved by the grand energies of
Savonarola's nature, that she found herself listening patiently to all
dogmas and prophecies, when they came in the vehicle of his ardent faith
and believing utterance.  [Note.]

No soul is desolate as long as there is a human being for whom it can
feel trust and reverence.  Romola's trust in Savonarola was something
like a rope suspended securely by her path, making her step elastic
while she grasped it; if it were suddenly removed, no firmness of the
ground she trod could save her from staggering, or perhaps from falling.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Note.  He himself had had occasion enough to note the efficacy of that
vehicle.  "If," he says in the _Compendium Revelationum_, "you speak of
such as have not heard these things from me, I admit that they who
disbelieve are more than they who believe, because it is one thing to
hear him who inwardly feels these things, and another to hear him who
feels them not; ... and, therefore, it is well said by Saint Jerome,
`Habet nescio quid latentis energiae vivae vocis actus, et in aures
discipuli de auctoris ore transfusa fortis sonat.'"



CHAPTER FORTY FIVE.

AT THE BARBER'S SHOP.

After that welcome appearance as the messenger with the olive-branch,
which was an unpromised favour of fortune, Tito had other commissions to
fulfil of a more premeditated character.  He paused at the Palazzo
Vecchio, and awaited there the return of the Ten, who managed external
and war affairs, that he might duly deliver to them the results of his
private mission to Pisa, intended as a preliminary to an avowed embassy
of which Bernardo Rucellai was to be the head, with the object of
coming, if possible, to a pacific understanding with the Emperor
Maximilian and the League.

Tito's talents for diplomatic work had been well ascertained, and as he
gave with fulness and precision the results of his inquiries and
interviews, Bernardo del Nero, who was at that time one of the Ten,
could not withhold his admiration.  He would have withheld it if he
could; for his original dislike of Tito had returned, and become
stronger, since the sale of the library.  Romola had never uttered a
word to her godfather on the circumstances of the sale, and Bernardo had
understood her silence as a prohibition to him to enter on the subject,
but he felt sure that the breach of her father's wish had been a
blighting grief to her, and the old man's observant eyes discerned other
indications that her married life was not happy.

"Ah," he said, inwardly, "that doubtless is the reason she has taken to
listening to Fra Girolamo, and going amongst the Piagnoni, which I never
expected from her.  These women, if they are not happy, and have no
children, must either take to folly or to some overstrained religion
that makes them think they've got all heaven's work on their shoulders.
And as for my poor child Romola, it is as I always said--the cramming
with Latin and Greek has left her as much a woman as if she had done
nothing all day but prick her fingers with the needle.  And this husband
of hers, who gets employed everywhere, because he's a tool with a smooth
handle, I wish Tornabuoni and the rest may not find their fingers cut.
Well, well, _solco torto, sacco dritto_--many a full sack comes from a
crooked furrow; and he who will be captain of none but honest men will
have small hire to pay."

With this long-established conviction that there could be no moral
sifting of political agents, the old Florentine abstained from all
interference in Tito's disfavour.  Apart from what must be kept sacred
and private for Romola's sake, Bernardo had nothing direct to allege
against the useful Greek, except that he was a Greek, and that he,
Bernardo, did not like him; for the doubleness of feigning attachment to
the popular government, while at heart a Medicean, was common to Tito
with more than half the Medicean party.  He only feigned with more skill
than the rest: that was all.  So Bernardo was simply cold to Tito, who
returned the coldness with a scrupulous, distant respect.  And it was
still the notion in Florence that the old tie between Bernardo and Bardo
made any service done to Romola's husband an acceptable homage to her
godfather.

After delivering himself of his charge at the Old Palace, Tito felt that
the avowed official work of the day was done.  He was tired and adust
with long riding; but he did not go home.  There were certain things in
his scarsella and on his mind, from which he wished to free himself as
soon as possible, but the opportunities must be found so skilfully that
they must not seem to be sought.  He walked from the Palazzo in a
sauntering fashion towards the Piazza del Duomo.  The procession was at
an end now, but the bells were still ringing, and the people were moving
about the streets restlessly, longing for some more definite vent to
their joy.  If the Frate could have stood up in the great Piazza and
preached to them, they might have been satisfied, but now, in spite of
the new discipline which declared Christ to be the special King of the
Florentines and required all pleasures to be of a Christian sort, there
was a secret longing in many of the youngsters who shouted "Viva Gesu!"
for a little vigorous stone throwing in sign of thankfulness.

Tito, as he passed along, could not escape being recognised by some as
the welcome bearer of the olive-branch, and could only rid himself of an
inconvenient ovation, chiefly in the form of eager questions, by telling
those who pressed on him that Meo di Sasso, the true messenger from
Leghorn, must now be entering, and might certainly be met towards the
Porta San Frediano.  He could tell much more than Tito knew.

Freeing himself from importunities in this adroit manner, he made his
way to the Piazza del Duomo, casting his long eyes round the space with
an air of the utmost carelessness, but really seeking to detect some
presence which might furnish him with one of his desired opportunities.
The fact of the procession having terminated at the Duomo made it
probable that there would be more than the usual concentration of
loungers and talkers in the Piazza and round Nello's shop.  It was as he
expected.  There was a group leaning against the rails near the north
gates of the Baptistery, so exactly what he sought, that he looked more
indifferent than ever, and seemed to recognise the tallest member of the
group entirely by chance as he had half passed him, just turning his
head to give him a slight greeting, while he tossed the end of his
_becchetto_ over his left shoulder.

Yet the tall, broad-shouldered personage greeted in that slight way
looked like one who had considerable claims.  He wore a
richly-embroidered tunic, with a great show of linen, after the newest
French mode, and at his belt there hung a sword and poniard of fine
workmanship.  His hat, with a red plume in it, seemed a scornful protest
against the gravity of Florentine costume, which had been exaggerated to
the utmost under the influence of the Piagnoni.  Certain undefinable
indications of youth made the breadth of his face and the large diameter
of his waist appear the more emphatically a stamp of coarseness, and his
eyes had that rude desecrating stare at all men and things which to a
refined mind is as intolerable as a bad odour or a flaring light.

He and his companions, also young men dressed expensively and wearing
arms, were exchanging jokes with that sort of ostentatious laughter
which implies a desire to prove that the laughter is not mortified
though some people might suspect it.  There were good reasons for such a
suspicion; for this broad-shouldered man with the red feather was Dolfo
Spini, leader of the Compagnacci, or Evil Companions--that is to say, of
all the dissolute young men belonging to the old aristocratic party,
enemies of the Mediceans, enemies of the popular government, but still
more bitter enemies of Savonarola.  Dolfo Spini, heir of the great house
with the loggia, over the bridge of the Santa Trinita, had organised
these young men into an armed band, as sworn champions of extravagant
suppers and all the pleasant sins of the flesh, against reforming
pietists who threatened to make the world chaste and temperate to so
intolerable a degree that there would soon be no reason for living,
except the extreme unpleasantness of the alternative.  Up to this very
morning he had been loudly declaring that Florence was given up to
famine and ruin entirely through its blind adherence to the advice of
the Frate, and that there could be no salvation for Florence but in
joining the League and driving the Frate out of the city--sending him to
Rome, in fact, whither he ought to have gone long ago in obedience to
the summons of the Pope.  It was suspected, therefore, that Messer Dolfo
Spini's heart was not aglow with pure joy at the unexpected succours
which had come in apparent fulfilment of the Frate's prediction, and the
laughter, which was ringing out afresh as Tito joined the group at
Nello's door, did not serve to dissipate the suspicion.  For leaning
against the door-post in the centre of the group was a close-shaven,
keen-eyed personage, named Niccolo Macchiavelli, who, young as he was,
had penetrated all the small secrets of egoism.

"Messer Dolfo's head," he was saying, "is more of a pumpkin than I
thought.  I measure men's dulness by the devices they trust in for
deceiving others.  Your dullest animal of all is he who grins and says
he doesn't mind just after he has had his shins kicked.  If I were a
trifle duller, now," he went on, smiling as the circle opened to admit
Tito, "I should pretend to be fond of this Melema, who has got a
secretaryship that would exactly suit me--as if Latin ill-paid could
love better Latin that's better paid!  Melema, you are a pestiferously
clever fellow, very much in my way, and I'm sorry to hear you've had
another piece of good-luck to-day."

"Questionable luck, Niccolo," said Tito, touching him on the shoulder in
a friendly way; "I have got nothing by it yet but being laid hold of and
breathed upon by wool-beaters, when I am as soiled and battered with
riding as a _tabellario_ (letter-carrier) from Bologna."

"Ah! you want a touch of my art, Messer Oratore," said Nello, who had
come forward at the sound of Tito's voice; "your chin, I perceive, has
yesterday's crop upon it.  Come, come--consign yourself to the priest of
all the Muses.  Sandro, quick with the lather!"

"In truth, Nello, that is just what I most desire at this moment," said
Tito, seating himself; "and that was why I turned my steps towards thy
shop, instead of going home at once, when I had done my business at the
Palazzo."

"Yes, indeed, it is not fitting that you should present yourself to
Madonna Romola with a rusty chin and a tangled _zazzera_.  Nothing that
is not dainty ought to approach the Florentine lily; though I see her
constantly going about like a sunbeam amongst the rags that line our
corners--if indeed she is not more like a moonbeam now, for I thought
yesterday, when I met her, that she looked as pale and worn as that
fainting Madonna of Fra Giovanni's.  You must see to it, my bel erudito:
she keeps too many fasts and vigils in your absence."

Tito gave a melancholy shrug.  "It is too true, Nello.  She has been
depriving herself of half her proper food _every_ day during this
famine.  But what can I do?  Her mind has been set all aflame.  A
husband's influence is powerless against the Frate's."

"As every other influence is likely to be, that of the Holy Father
included," said Domenico Cennini, one of the group at the door, who had
turned in with Tito.  "I don't know whether you have gathered anything
at Pisa about the way the wind sits at Rome, Melema?"

"Secrets of the council-chamber, Messer Domenico!" said Tito, smiling
and opening his palms in a deprecatory manner.  "An envoy must be as
dumb as a father confessor."

"Certainly, certainly," said Cennini.  "I ask for no breach of that
rule.  Well, my belief is, that if his Holiness were to drive Fra
Girolamo to extremity, the Frate would move heaven and earth to get a
General Council of the Church--ay, and would get it too; and I, for one,
should not be sorry, though I'm no Piagnone."

"With leave of your greater experience, Messer Domenico," said
Macchiavelli, "I must differ from you--not in your wish to see a General
Council which might reform the Church, but in your belief that the Frate
will checkmate his Holiness.  The Frate's game is an impossible one.  If
he had contented himself with preaching against the vices of Rome, and
with prophesying that in some way, not mentioned, Italy would be
scourged, depend upon it Pope Alexander would have allowed him to spend
his breath in that way as long as he could find hearers.  Such spiritual
blasts as those knock no walls down.  But the Frate wants to be
something more than a spiritual trumpet: he wants to be a lever, and
what is more, he _is_ a lever.  He wants to spread the doctrine of
Christ by maintaining a popular government in Florence, and the Pope, as
I know, on the best authority, has private views to the contrary."

"Then Florence will stand by the Frate," Cennini broke in, with some
fervour.  "I myself should prefer that he would let his prophesying
alone, but if our freedom to choose our own government is to be
attacked--I am an obedient son of the Church, but I would vote for
resisting Pope Alexander the Sixth, as our forefathers resisted Pope
Gregory the Eleventh."

"But pardon me, Messer Domenico," said Macchiavelli, sticking his thumbs
into his belt, and speaking with that cool enjoyment of exposition which
surmounts every other force in discussion.  "Have you correctly seized
the Frate's position?  How is it that he has become a lever, and made
himself worth attacking by an acute man like his Holiness?  Because he
has got the ear of the people: because he gives them threats and
promises, which they believe come straight from God, not only about
hell, purgatory, and paradise, but about Pisa and our Great Council.
But let events go against him, so as to shake the people's faith, and
the cause of his power will be the cause of his fall.  He is
accumulating three sorts of hatred on his head--the hatred of average
mankind against every one who wants to lay on them a strict yoke of
virtue; the hatred of the stronger powers in Italy who want to farm
Florence for their own purposes; and the hatred of the people, to whom
he has ventured to promise good in this world, instead of confining his
promises to the next.  If a prophet is to keep his power, he must be a
prophet like Mahomet, with an army at his back, that when the people's
faith is fainting it may be frightened into life again."

"Rather sum up the three sorts of hatred in one," said Francesco Cei,
impetuously, "and say he has won the hatred of all men who have sense
and honesty, by inventing hypocritical lies.  His proper place is among
the false prophets in the Inferno, who walk with their heads turned
hind-foremost."

"You are too angry, my Francesco," said Macchiavelli, smiling; "you
poets are apt to cut the clouds in your wrath.  I am no votary of the
Frate's, and would not lay down my little finger for his veracity.  But
veracity is a plant of paradise, and the seeds have never flourished
beyond the walls.  You, yourself, my Francesco, tell poetical lies only;
partly compelled by the poet's fervour, partly to please your audience;
but _you_ object to lies in prose.  Well, the Frate differs from you as
to the boundary of poetry, that's all.  When he gets into the pulpit of
the Duomo, he has the fervour within him, and without him he has the
audience to please.  Ecco!"

"You are somewhat lax there, Niccolo," said Cennini, gravely.  "I myself
believe in the Frate's integrity, though I don't believe in his
prophecies, and as long as his integrity is not disproved, we have a
popular party strong enough to protect him and resist foreign
interference."

"A party that seems strong enough," said Macchiavelli, with a shrug, and
an almost imperceptible glance towards Tito, who was abandoning himself
with much enjoyment to Nello's combing and scenting.  "But how many
Mediceans are there among you?  How many who will not be turned round by
a private grudge?"

"As to the Mediceans," said Cennini, "I believe there is very little
genuine feeling left on behalf of the Medici.  Who would risk much for
Piero de' Medici?  A few old staunch friends, perhaps, like Bernardo del
Nero; but even some of those most connected with the family are hearty
friends of the popular government, and would exert themselves for the
Frate.  I was talking to Giannozzo Pucci only a little while ago, and I
am convinced there's nothing he would set his face against more than
against any attempt to alter the new order of things."

"You are right there, Messer Domenico," said Tito, with a laughing
meaning in his eyes, as he rose from the shaving-chair; "and I fancy the
tender passion came in aid of hard theory there.  I am persuaded there
was some jealousy at the bottom of Giannozzo's alienation from Piero de'
Medici; else so amiable a creature as he would never feel the bitterness
he sometimes allows to escape him in that quarter.  He was in the
procession with you, I suppose?"

"No," said Cennini; "he is at his villa--went there three days ago."

Tito was settling his cap and glancing down at his splashed hose as if
he hardly heeded the answer.  In reality he had obtained a much-desired
piece of information.  He had at that moment in his scarsella a crushed
gold ring which he had engaged to deliver to Giannozzo Pucci.  He had
received it from an envoy of Piero de' Medici, whom he had ridden out of
his way to meet at Certaldo on the Siena road.  Since Pucci was not in
the town, he would send the ring by Fra Michele, a Carthusian lay
Brother in the service of the Mediceans, and the receipt of that sign
would bring Pucci back to hear the verbal part of Tito's mission.

"Behold him!" said Nello, flourishing his comb and pointing it at Tito,
"the handsomest scholar in the world or in the wolds, [`Del mondo o di
maremma'] now he has passed through my hands!  A trifle thinner in the
face, though, than when he came in his first bloom to Florence--eh? and,
I vow, there are some lines just faintly hinting themselves about your
mouth, Messer Oratore!  Ah, mind is an enemy to beauty!  I myself was
thought beautiful by the women at one time--when I was in my
swaddling-bands.  But now--oime!  I carry my unwritten poems in cipher
on my face!"

Tito, laughing with the rest as Nello looked at himself tragically in
the hand-mirror, made a sign of farewell to the company generally, and
took his departure.

"I'm of our old Piero di Cosimo's mind," said Francesco Cei.  "I don't
half like Melema.  That trick of smiling gets stronger than ever--no
wonder he has lines about the mouth."

"He's too successful," said Macchiavelli, playfully.  "I'm sure there's
something wrong about him, else he wouldn't have that secretaryship."

"He's an able man," said Cennini, in a tone of judicial fairness.  "I
and my brother have always found him useful with our Greek sheets, and
he gives great satisfaction to the Ten.  I like to see a young man work
his way upward by merit.  And the secretary Scala, who befriended him
from the first, thinks highly of him still, I know."

"Doubtless," said a notary in the background.  "He writes Scala's
official letters for him, or corrects them, and gets well paid for it
too."

"I wish Messer Bartolommeo would pay _me_ to doctor his gouty Latin,"
said Macchiavelli, with a shrug.  "Did _he_ tell you about the pay, Ser
Ceccone, or was it Melema himself?" he added, looking at the notary with
a face ironically innocent.

"Melema? no, indeed," answered Ser Ceccone.  "He is as close as a nut.
He never brags.  That's why he's employed everywhere.  They say he's
getting rich with doing all sorts of underhand work."

"It _is_ a little too bad," said Macchiavelli, "and so many able
notaries out of employment!"

"Well, I must say I thought that was a nasty story a year or two ago
about the man who said he had stolen jewels," said Cei.  "It got hushed
up somehow; but I remember Piero di Cosimo said, at the time, he
believed there was something in it, for he saw Melema's face when the
man laid hold of him, and he never saw a visage so `painted with fear,'
as our sour old Dante says."

"Come, spit no more of that venom, Francesco," said Nello, getting
indignant, "else I shall consider it a public duty to cut your hair awry
the next time I get you under my scissors.  That story of the stolen
jewels was a lie.  Bernardo Rucellai and the Magnificent Eight knew all
about it.  The man was a dangerous madman, and he was very properly kept
out of mischief in prison.  As for our Piero di Cosimo, his wits are
running after the wind of Mongibello: he has such an extravagant fancy
that he would take a lizard for a crocodile.  No: that story has been
dead and buried too long--our noses object to it."

"It is true," said Macchiavelli.  "You forget the danger of the
precedent, Francesco.  The next mad beggarman may accuse you of stealing
his verses, or me, God help me! of stealing his coppers.  Ah!" he went
on, turning towards the door, "Dolfo Spini has carried his red feather
out of the Piazza.  That captain of swaggerers would like the Republic
to lose Pisa just for the chance of seeing the people tear the frock off
the Frate's back.  With your pardon, Francesco--I know he is a friend of
yours--there are few things I should like better than to see him play
the part of Capo d'Oca, who went out to the tournament blowing his
trumpets and returned with them in a bag."



CHAPTER FORTY SIX.

BY A STREET LAMP.

That evening, when it was dark and threatening rain, Romola, returning
with Maso and the lantern by her side, from the hospital of San Matteo,
which she had visited after vespers, encountered her husband just
issuing from the monastery of San Marco.  Tito, who had gone out again
shortly after his arrival in the Via de' Bardi, and had seen little of
Romola during the day, immediately proposed to accompany her home,
dismissing Maso, whose short steps annoyed him.  It was only usual for
him to pay her such an official attention when it was obviously demanded
from him.  Tito and Romola never jarred, never remonstrated with each
other.  They were too hopelessly alienated in their inner life ever to
have that contest which is an effort towards agreement.  They talked of
all affairs, public and private, with careful adherence to an adopted
course.  If Tito wanted a supper prepared in the old library, now
pleasantly furnished as a banqueting-room, Romola assented, and saw that
everything needful was done: and Tito, on his side, left her entirely
uncontrolled in her daily habits, accepting the help she offered him in
transcribing or making digests, and in return meeting her conjectured
want of supplies for her charities.  Yet he constantly, as on this very
morning, avoided exchanging glances with her; affected to believe that
she was out of the house, in order to avoid seeking her in her own room;
and playfully attributed to her a perpetual preference of solitude to
his society.

In the first ardour of her self-conquest, after she had renounced her
resolution of flight, Romola had made many timid efforts towards the
return of a frank relation between them.  But to her such a relation
could only come by open speech about their differences, and the attempt
to arrive at a moral understanding; while Tito could only be saved from
alienation from her by such a recovery of her effusive tenderness as
would have presupposed oblivion of their differences.  He cared for no
explanation between them; he felt any thorough explanation impossible:
he would have cared to have Romola fond again, and to her, fondness was
impossible.  She could be submissive and gentle, she could repress any
sign of repulsion; but tenderness was not to be feigned.  She was
helplessly conscious of the result: her husband was alienated from her.

It was an additional reason why she should be carefully kept outside of
secrets which he would in no case have chosen to communicate to her.
With regard to his political action he sought to convince her that he
considered the cause of the Medici hopeless; and that on that practical
ground, as well as in theory, he heartily served the popular government,
in which she had now a warm interest.  But impressions subtle as odours
made her uneasy about his relations with San Marco.  She was painfully
divided between the dread of seeing any evidence to arouse her
suspicions, and the impulse to watch lest any harm should come that she
might have arrested.

As they walked together this evening, Tito said--"The business of the
day is not yet quite ended for me.  I shall conduct you to our door, my
Romola, and then I must fulfil another commission, which will take me an
hour, perhaps, before I can return and rest, as I very much need to do."

And then he talked amusingly of what he had seen at Pisa, until they
were close upon a loggia, near which there hung a lamp before a picture
of the Virgin.  The street was a quiet one, and hitherto they had passed
few people; but now there was a sound of many approaching footsteps and
confused voices.

"We shall not get home without a wetting, unless we take shelter under
this convenient loggia," Tito said, hastily, hurrying Romola, with a
slightly startled movement, up the step of the loggia.

"Surely it is useless to wait for this small drizzling rain," said
Romola, in surprise.

"No: I felt it becoming heavier.  Let us wait a little."  With that
wakefulness to the faintest indication which belongs to a mind
habitually in a state of caution, Tito had detected by the glimmer of
the lamp that the leader of the advancing group wore a red feather and a
glittering sword-hilt--in fact, was almost the last person in the world
he would have chosen to meet at this hour with Romola by his side.  He
had already during the day had one momentous interview with Dolfo Spini,
and the business he had spoken of to Romola as yet to be done was a
second interview with that personage, a sequence of the visit he had
paid at San Marco.  Tito, by a long-preconcerted plan, had been the
bearer of letters to Savonarola--carefully-forged letters; one of them,
by a stratagem, bearing the very signature and seal of the Cardinal of
Naples, who of all the Sacred College had most exerted his influence at
Rome in favour of the Frate.  The purport of the letters was to state
that the Cardinal was on his progress from Pisa, and, unwilling for
strong reasons to enter Florence, yet desirous of taking counsel with
Savonarola at this difficult juncture, intended to pause this very day
at San Casciano, about ten miles from the city, whence he would ride out
the next morning in the plain garb of a priest, and meet Savonarola, as
if casually, five miles on the Florence road, two hours after sunrise.
The plot, of which these forged letters were the initial step, was that
Dolfo Spini with a band of his Compagnacci was to be posted in ambush on
the road, at a lonely spot about five miles from the gates; that he was
to seize Savonarola with the Dominican brother who would accompany him
according to rule, and deliver him over to a small detachment of
Milanese horse in readiness near San Casciano, by whom he was to be
carried into the Roman territory.

There was a strong chance that the penetrating Frate would suspect a
trap, and decline to incur the risk, which he had for some time avoided,
of going beyond the city walls.  Even when he preached, his friends held
it necessary that he should be attended by an armed guard; and here he
was called on to commit himself to a solitary road, with no other
attendant than a fellow-monk.  On this ground the minimum of time had
been given him for decision, and the chance in favour of his acting on
the letters was, that the eagerness with which his mind was set on the
combining of interests within and without the Church towards the
procuring of a General Council, and also the expectation of immediate
service from the Cardinal in the actual juncture of his contest with the
Pope, would triumph over his shrewdness and caution in the brief space
allowed for deliberation.

Tito had had an audience of Savonarola, having declined to put the
letters into any hands but his, and with consummate art had admitted
that incidentally, and by inference, he was able so far to conjecture
their purport as to believe they referred to a rendezvous outside the
gates, in which case he urged that the Frate should seek an armed guard
from the Signoria, and offered his services in carrying the request with
the utmost privacy.  Savonarola had replied briefly that this was
impossible: an armed guard was incompatible with privacy.  He spoke with
a flashing eye, and Tito felt convinced that he meant to incur the risk.

Tito himself did not much care for the result.  He managed his affairs
so cleverly, that all results, he considered, must turn to his
advantage.  Whichever party came uppermost, he was secure of favour and
money.  That is an indecorously naked statement; the fact, clothed as
Tito habitually clothed it, was that his acute mind, discerning the
equal hollowness of all parties, took the only rational course in making
them subservient to his own interest.

If Savonarola fell into the snare, there were diamonds in question and
papal patronage; if not, Tito's adroit agency had strengthened his
position with Savonarola and with Spini, while any confidences he
obtained from them made him the more valuable as an agent of the
Mediceans.

But Spini was an inconvenient colleague.  He had cunning enough to
delight in plots, but not the ability or self-command necessary to so
complex an effect as secrecy.  He frequently got excited with drinking,
for even sober Florence had its "Beoni," or topers, both lay and
clerical, who became loud at taverns and private banquets; and in spite
of the agreement between him and Tito, that their public recognition of
each other should invariably be of the coolest sort, there was always
the possibility that on an evening encounter he would be suddenly
blurting and affectionate.  The delicate sign of casting the becchetto
over the left shoulder was understood in the morning, but the strongest
hint short of a threat might not suffice to keep off a fraternal grasp
of the shoulder in the evening.

Tito's chief hope now was that Dolfo Spini had not caught sight of him,
and the hope would have been well founded if Spini had had no clearer
view of him than he had caught of Spini.  But, himself in shadow, he had
seen Tito illuminated for an instant by the direct rays of the lamp, and
Tito in his way was as strongly marked a personage as the captain of the
Compagnacci.  Romola's black-shrouded figure had escaped notice, and she
now stood behind her husband's shoulder in the corner of the loggia.
Tito was not left to hope long.

"Ha! my carrier-pigeon!" grated Spini's harsh voice, in what he meant to
be an undertone, while his hand grasped Tito's shoulder; "what did you
run into hiding for?  You didn't know it was comrades who were coming.
It's well I caught sight of you; it saves time.  What of the chase
to-morrow morning?  Will the bald-headed game rise?  Are the falcons to
be got ready?"

If it had been in Tito's nature to feel an access of rage, he would have
felt it against this bull-faced accomplice, unfit either for a leader or
a tool.  His lips turned white, but his excitement came from the
pressing difficulty of choosing a safe device.  If he attempted to hush
Spini, that would only deepen Romola's suspicion, and he knew her well
enough to know that if some strong alarm were roused in her, she was
neither to be silenced nor hoodwinked: on the other hand, if he repelled
Spini angrily the wine-breathing Compagnaccio might become savage, being
more ready at resentment than at the divination of motives.  He adopted
a third course, which proved that Romola retained one sort of power over
him--the power of dread.

He pressed her hand, as if intending a hint to her, and said in a
good-humoured tone of comradeship--

"Yes, my Dolfo, you may prepare in all security.  But take no trumpets
with you."

"Don't be afraid," said Spini, a little piqued.  "No need to play Ser
Saccente with me.  I know where the devil keeps his tail as well as you
do.  What! he swallowed the bait whole?  The prophetic nose didn't scent
the hook at all?" he went on, lowering his tone a little, with a
blundering sense of secrecy.

"The brute will not be satisfied till he has emptied the bag," thought
Tito: but aloud he said,--"Swallowed all as easily as you swallow a cup
of Trebbiano.  Ha!  I see torches: there must be a dead body coming.
The pestilence has been spreading, I hear."

"Santiddio!  I hate the sight of those biers.  Good-night," said Spini,
hastily moving off.

The torches were really coming, but they preceded a church dignitary who
was returning homeward; the suggestion of the dead body and the
pestilence was Tito's device for getting rid of Spini without telling
him to go.  The moment he had moved away, Tito turned to Romola, and
said, quietly--

"Do not be alarmed by anything that _bestia_ has said, my Romola.  We
will go on now: I think the rain has not increased."

She was quivering with indignant resolution; it was of no use for Tito
to speak in that unconcerned way.  She distrusted every word he could
utter.

"I will not go on," she said.  "I will not move nearer home until I have
some security against this treachery being perpetrated."

"Wait, at least, until these torches have passed," said Tito, with
perfect self-command, but with a new rising of dislike to a wife who
this time, he foresaw, might have the power of thwarting him in spite of
the husband's predominance.

The torches passed, with the Vicario dell' Arcivescovo, and due
reverence was done by Tito, but Romola saw nothing outward.  If for the
defeat of this treachery, in which she believed with all the force of
long presentiment, it had been necessary at that moment for her to
spring on her husband and hurl herself with him down a precipice, she
felt as if she could have done it.  Union with this man!  At that moment
the self-quelling discipline of two years seemed to be nullified: she
felt nothing but that they were divided.

They were nearly in darkness again, and could only see each other's
faces dimly.

"Tell me the truth, Tito--this time tell me the truth," said Romola, in
a low quivering voice.  "It will be safer for you."

"Why should I desire to tell you anything else, my angry saint?" said
Tito, with a slight touch of contempt, which was the vent of his
annoyance; "since the truth is precisely that over which you have most
reason to rejoice--namely, that my knowing a plot of Spini's enables me
to secure the Frate from falling a victim to it."

"What is the plot?"

"That I decline to tell," said Tito.  "It is enough that the Frate's
safety will be secured."

"It is a plot for drawing him outside the gates that Spini may murder
him."

"There has been no intention of murder.  It is simply a plot for
compelling him to obey the Pope's summons to Rome.  But as I serve the
popular government, and think the Frate's presence here is a necessary
means of maintaining it at present, I choose to prevent his departure.
You may go to sleep with entire ease of mind to-night."

For a moment Romola was silent.  Then she said, in a voice of anguish,
"Tito, it is of no use: I have no belief in you."

She could just discern his action as he shrugged his shoulders, and
spread out his palms in silence.  That cold dislike which is the anger
of unimpassioned beings was hardening within him.

"If the Frate leaves the city--if any harm happens to him," said Romola,
after a slight pause, in a new tone of indignant resolution,--"I will
declare what I have heard to the Signoria, and you will be disgraced.
What if I am your wife?" she went on, impetuously; "I will be disgraced
with you.  If we are united, I am that part of you that will save you
from crime.  Others shall not be betrayed."

"I am quite aware of what you would be likely to do, _anima mia_," said
Tito, in the coolest of his liquid tones; "therefore if you have a small
amount of reasoning at your disposal just now, consider that if you
believe me in nothing else, you may believe me when I say I will take
care of myself, and not put it in your power to ruin me."

"Then you assure me that the Frate is warned--he will not go beyond the
gates?"

"He shall not go beyond the gates."

There was a moment's pause, but distrust was not to be expelled.

"I will go back to San Marco now and find out," Romola said, making a
movement forward.

"You shall not!" said Tito, in a bitter whisper, seizing her wrists with
all his masculine force.  "I am master of you.  You shall not set
yourself in opposition to me."

There were passers-by approaching.  Tito had heard them, and that was
why he spoke in a whisper.  Romola was too conscious of being mastered
to have struggled, even if she had remained unconscious that witnesses
were at hand.  But she was aware now of footsteps and voices, and her
habitual sense of personal dignity made her at once yield to Tito's
movement towards leading her from the loggia.

They walked on in silence for some time, under the small drizzling rain.
The first rush of indignation and alarm in Romola had begun to give way
to more complicated feelings, which rendered speech and action
difficult.  In that simpler state of vehemence, open opposition to the
husband from whom she felt her soul revolting had had the aspect of
temptation for her; it seemed the easiest of all courses.  But now,
habits of self-questioning, memories of impulse subdued, and that proud
reserve which all discipline had left unmodified, began to emerge from
the flood of passion.  The grasp of her wrists, which asserted her
husband's physical predominance, instead of arousing a new fierceness in
her, as it might have done if her impetuosity had been of a more vulgar
kind, had given her a momentary shuddering horror at this form of
contest with him.  It was the first time they had been in declared
hostility to each other since her flight and return, and the check given
to her ardent resolution then, retained the power to arrest her now.  In
this altered condition her mind began to dwell on the probabilities that
would save her from any desperate course: Tito would not risk betrayal
by her; whatever had been his original intention, he must be determined
now by the fact that she knew of the plot.  She was not bound now to do
anything else than to hang over him that certainty, that if he deceived
her, her lips would not, be closed.  And then, it was possible--yes, she
must cling to that possibility till it was disproved--that Tito had
never meant to aid in the betrayal of the Frate.

Tito, on his side, was busy with thoughts, and did not speak again till
they were near home.  Then he said--

"Well, Romola, have you now had time to recover calmness?  If so, you
can supply your want of belief in me by a little rational inference: you
can see, I presume, that if I had had any intention of furthering
Spini's plot, I should now be aware that the possession of a fair
Piagnone for my wife, who knows the secret of the plot, would be a
serious obstacle in my way."

Tito assumed the tone which was just then the easiest to him,
conjecturing that in Romola's present mood persuasive deprecation would
be lost upon her.

"Yes, Tito," she said, in a low voice, "I think you believe that I would
guard the Republic from further treachery.  You are right to believe it:
if the Frate is betrayed, I will denounce you."  She paused a moment,
and then said, with an effort, "But it was not so.  I have perhaps
spoken too hastily--you never meant it.  Only, why will you seem to be
that man's comrade?"

"Such relations are inevitable to practical men, my Romola," said Tito,
gratified by discerning the struggle within her.  "You fair creatures
live in the clouds.  Pray go to rest with an easy heart," he added,
opening the door for her.



CHAPTER FORTY SEVEN.

CHECK.

Tito's clever arrangements had been unpleasantly frustrated by trivial
incidents which could not enter into a clever man's calculations.  It
was very seldom that he walked with Romola in the evening, yet he had
happened to be walking with her precisely on this evening when her
presence was supremely inconvenient.  Life was so complicated a game
that the devices of skill were liable to be defeated at every turn by
air-blown chances, incalculable as the descent of thistle-down.

It was not that he minded about the failure of Spini's plot, but he felt
an awkward difficulty in so adjusting his warning to Savonarola on the
one hand, and to Spini on the other, as not to incur suspicion.
Suspicion roused in the popular party might be fatal to his reputation
and ostensible position in Florence: suspicion roused in Dolfo Spini
might be as disagreeable in its effects as the hatred of a fierce dog
not to be chained.

If Tito went forthwith to the monastery to warn Savonarola before the
monks went to rest, his warning would follow so closely on his delivery
of the forged letters that he could not escape unfavourable surmises.
He could not warn Spini at once without telling him the true reason,
since he could not immediately allege the discovery that Savonarola had
changed his purpose; and he knew Spini well enough to know that his
understanding would discern nothing but that Tito had "turned round" and
frustrated the plot.  On the other hand, by deferring his warning to
Savonarola until the morning, he would be almost sure to lose the
opportunity of warning Spini that the Frate had changed his mind; and
the band of Compagnacci would come back in all the rage of
disappointment.  This last, however, was the risk he chose, trusting to
his power of soothing Spini by assuring him that the failure was due
only to the Frate's caution.

Tito was annoyed.  If he had had to smile it would have been an unusual
effort to him.  He was determined not to encounter Romola again, and he
did not go home that night.

She watched through the night, and never took off her clothes.  She
heard the rain become heavier and heavier.  She liked to hear the rain:
the stormy heavens seemed a safeguard against men's devices, compelling
them to inaction.  And Romola's mind was again assailed, not only by the
utmost doubt of her husband, but by doubt as to her own conduct.  What
lie might he not have told her?  What project might he not have, of
which she was still ignorant?  Every one who trusted Tito was in danger;
it was useless to try and persuade herself of the contrary.  And was not
she selfishly listening to the promptings of her own pride, when she
shrank from warning men against him?  "If her husband was a malefactor,
her place was in the prison by his side"--that might be; she was
contented to fulfil that claim.  But was she, a wife, to allow a husband
to inflict the injuries that would make him a malefactor, when it might
be in her power to prevent them?  Prayer seemed impossible to her.  The
activity of her thought excluded a mental state of which the essence is
expectant passivity.

The excitement became stronger and stronger.  Her imagination, in a
state of morbid activity, conjured up possible schemes by which, after
all, Tito would have eluded her threat; and towards daybreak the rain
became less violent, till at last it ceased, the breeze rose again and
dispersed the clouds, and the morning fell clear on all the objects
around her.  It made her uneasiness all the less endurable.  She wrapped
her mantle round her, and ran up to the loggia, as if there could be
anything in the wide landscape that might determine her action; as if
there could be anything but roofs hiding the line of street along which
Savonarola might be walking towards betrayal.

If she went to her godfather, might she not induce him, without any
specific revelation, to take measures for preventing Fra Girolamo from
passing the gates?  But that might be too late.  Romola thought, with
new distress, that she had failed to learn any guiding details from
Tito, and it was already long past seven.  She must go to San Marco:
there was nothing else to be done.

She hurried down the stairs, she went out into the street without
looking at her sick people, and walked at a swift pace along the Via de'
Bardi towards the Ponte Vecchio.  She would go through the heart of the
city; it was the most direct road, and, besides, in the great Piazza
there was a chance of encountering her husband, who, by some possibility
to which she still clung, might satisfy her of the Frate's safety, and
leave no need for her to go to San Marco.  When she arrived in front of
the Palazzo Vecchio, she looked eagerly into the pillared court; then
her eyes swept the Piazza; but the well-known figure, once painted in
her heart by young love, and now branded there by eating pain, was
nowhere to be seen.  She hurried straight on to the Piazza del Duomo.
It was already full of movement: there were worshippers passing up and
down the marble steps, there were men pausing for chat, and there were
market-people carrying their burdens.  Between those moving figures
Romola caught a glimpse of her husband.  On his way from San Marco he
had turned into Nello's shop, and was now leaning against the door-post.
As Romola approached she could see that he was standing and talking,
with the easiest air in the world, holding his cap in his hand, and
shaking back his freshly-combed hair.  The contrast of this ease with
the bitter anxieties he had created convulsed her with indignation: the
new vision of his hardness heightened her dread.  She recognised Cronaca
and two other frequenters of San Marco standing near her husband.  It
flashed through her mind--"I will compel him to speak before those men."
And her light step brought her close upon him before he had time to
move, while Cronaca was saying, "Here comes Madonna Romola."

A slight shock passed through Tito's frame as he felt himself face to
face with his wife.  She was haggard with her anxious watching, but
there was a flash of something else than anxiety in her eyes as she
said--

"Is the Frate gone beyond the gates?"

"No," said Tito, feeling completely helpless before this woman, and
needing all the self-command he possessed to preserve a countenance in
which there should seem to be nothing stronger than surprise.

"And you are certain that he is not going?" she insisted.

"I am certain that he is not going."

"That is enough," said Romola, and she turned up the steps, to take
refuge in the Duomo, till she could recover from her agitation.

Tito never had a feeling so near hatred as that with which his eyes
followed Romola retreating up the steps.

There were present not only genuine followers of the Frate, but Ser
Ceccone, the notary, who at that time, like Tito himself, was secretly
an agent of the Mediceans.

Ser Francesco di Ser Barone, more briefly known to infamy as Ser
Ceccone, was not learned, not handsome, not successful, and the reverse
of generous.  He was a traitor without charm.  It followed that he was
not fond of Tito Melema.



CHAPTER FORTY EIGHT.

COUNTER-CHECK.

It was late in the afternoon when Tito returned home.  Romola, seated
opposite the cabinet in her narrow room, copying documents, was about to
desist from her work because the light was getting dim, when her husband
entered.  He had come straight to this room to seek her, with a
thoroughly defined intention, and there was something new to Romola in
his manner and expression as he looked at her silently on entering, and,
without taking off his cap and mantle, leaned one elbow on the cabinet,
and stood directly in front of her.

Romola, fully assured during the day of the Frate's safety, was feeling
the reaction of some penitence for the access of distrust and
indignation which had impelled her to address her husband publicly on a
matter that she knew he wished to be private.  She told herself that she
had probably been wrong.  The scheming duplicity which she had heard
even her godfather allude to as inseparable from party tactics might be
sufficient to account for the connection with Spini, without the
supposition that Tito had ever meant to further the plot.  She wanted to
atone for her impetuosity by confessing that she had been too hasty, and
for some hours her mind had been dwelling on the possibility that this
confession of hers might lead to other frank words breaking the two
years' silence of their hearts.  The silence had been so complete, that
Tito was ignorant of her having fled from him and come back again; they
had never approached an avowal of that past which, both in its young
love and in the shock that shattered the love, lay locked away from them
like a banquet-room where death had once broken the feast.

She looked up at him with that submission in her glance which belonged
to her state of self-reproof; but the subtle change in his face and
manner arrested her speech.  For a few moments they remained silent,
looking at each other.

Tito himself felt that a crisis was come in his married life.  The
husband's determination to mastery, which lay deep below all blandness
and beseechingness, had risen permanently to the surface now, and seemed
to alter his face, as a face is altered by a hidden muscular tension
with which a man is secretly throttling or stamping out the life from
something feeble, yet dangerous.

"Romola," he began, in the cool liquid tone that made her shiver, "it is
time that we should understand each other."  He paused.

"That is what I most desire, Tito," she said, faintly.  Her sweet pale
face; with all its anger gone and nothing but the timidity of self-doubt
in it, seemed to give a marked predominance to her husband's dark
strength.

"You took a step this morning," Tito went on, "which you must now
yourself perceive to have been useless--which exposed you to remark and
may involve me in serious practical difficulties."

"I acknowledge that I was too hasty; I am sorry for any injustice I may
have done you."  Romola spoke these words in a fuller and firmer tone;
Tito, she hoped, would look less hard when she had expressed her regret,
and then she could say other things.

"I wish you once for all to understand," he said, without any change of
voice, "that such collisions are incompatible with our position as
husband and wife.  I wish you to reflect on the mode in which you were
led to that step, that the process may not he repeated."

"That depends chiefly on you, Tito," said Romola, taking fire slightly.
It was not at all what she had thought of saying, but we see a very
little way before us in mutual speech.

"You would say, I suppose," answered Tito, "that nothing is to occur in
future which can excite your unreasonable suspicions.  You were frank
enough to say last night that you have no belief in me.  I am not
surprised at any exaggerated conclusion you may draw from slight
premises, but I wish to point out to you what is likely to be the fruit
of your making such exaggerated conclusions a ground for interfering in
affairs of which you are ignorant.  Your attention is thoroughly awake
to what I am saying?"

He paused for a reply.

"Yes," said Romola, flushing in irrepressible resentment at this cold
tone of superiority.

"Well, then, it may possibly not be very long before some other chance
words or incidents set your imagination at work devising crimes for me,
and you may perhaps rush to the Palazzo Vecchio to alarm the Signoria
and set the city in an uproar.  Shall I tell you what may be the result?
Not simply the disgrace of your husband, to which you look forward with
so much courage, but the arrest and ruin of many among the chief men in
Florence, including Messer Bernardo del Nero."

Tito had meditated a decisive move, and he had made it.  The flush died
out of Romola's face, and her very lips were pale--an unusual effect
with her, for she was little subject to fear.  Tito perceived his
success.

"You would perhaps flatter yourself," he went on, "that you were
performing a heroic deed of deliverance; you might as well try to turn
locks with fine words as apply such notions to the politics of Florence.
The question now is, not whether you can have any belief in me, but
whether, now you have been warned, you will dare to rush, like a blind
man with a torch in his hand, amongst intricate affairs of which you
know nothing."

Romola felt as if her mind were held in a vice by Tito's: the
possibilities he had indicated were rising before her with terrible
clearness.

"I am too rash," she said.  "I will try not to be rash."

"Remember," said Tito, with unsparing insistance, "that your act of
distrust towards me this morning might, for aught you knew, have had
more fatal effects than that sacrifice of your husband which you have
learned to contemplate without flinching."

"Tito, it is not so," Romola burst forth in a pleading tone, rising and
going nearer to him, with a desperate resolution to speak out.  "It is
false that I would willingly sacrifice you.  It has been the greatest
effort of my life to cling to you.  I went away in my anger two years
ago, and I came back again because I was more bound to you than to
anything else on earth.  But it is useless.  You shut me out from your
mind.  You affect to think of me as a being too unreasonable to share in
the knowledge of your affairs.  You will be open with me about nothing."

She looked like his good angel pleading with him, as she bent her face
towards him with dilated eyes, and laid her hand upon his arm.  But
Romola's touch and glance no longer stirred any fibre of tenderness in
her husband.  The good-humoured, tolerant Tito, incapable of hatred,
incapable almost of impatience, disposed always to be gentle towards the
rest of the world, felt himself becoming strangely hard towards this
wife whose presence had once been the strongest influence he had known.
With all his softness of disposition, he had a masculine effectiveness
of intellect and purpose which, like sharpness of edge, is itself an
energy, working its way without any strong momentum.  Romola had an
energy of her own which thwarted his, and no man, who is not
exceptionally feeble, will endure being thwarted by his wife.  Marriage
must be a relation either of sympathy or of conquest.

No emotion darted across his face as he heard Romola for the first time
speak of having gone away from him.  His lips only looked a little
harder as he smiled slightly and said--

"My Romola, when certain conditions are ascertained, we must make up our
minds to them.  No amount of wishing will fill the Arno, as your people
say, or turn a plum into an orange.  I have not observed even that
prayers have much efficacy that way.  You are so constituted as to have
certain strong impressions inaccessible to reason: I cannot share those
impressions, and you have withdrawn all trust from me in consequence.
You have changed towards me; it has followed that I have changed towards
you.  It is useless to take any retrospect.  We have simply to adapt
ourselves to altered conditions."

"Tito, it would not be useless for us to speak openly," said Romola,
with the sort of exasperation that comes from using living muscle
against some lifeless insurmountable resistance.  "It was the sense of
deception in you that changed me, and that has kept us apart.  And it is
not true that I changed first.  You changed towards me the night you
first wore that chain-armour.  You had some secret from me--it was about
that old man--and I saw him again yesterday.  Tito," she went on, in a
tone of agonised entreaty, "if you would once tell me everything, let it
be what it may--I would not mind pain--that there might be no wall
between us!  Is it not possible that we could begin a new life?"

This time there was a flash of emotion across Tito's face.  He stood
perfectly still; but the flash seemed to have whitened him.  He took no
notice of Romola's appeal, but after a moment's pause, said quietly--

"Your impetuosity about trifles, Romola, has a freezing influence that
would cool the baths of Nero."  At these cutting words, Romola shrank
and drew herself up into her usual self-sustained attitude.  Tito went
on.  "If by `that old man' you mean the mad Jacopo di Nola who attempted
my life and made a strange accusation against me, of which I told you
nothing because it would have alarmed you to no purpose, he, poor
wretch, has died in prison.  I saw his name in the list of dead."

"I know nothing about his accusation," said Romola.  "But I know he is
the man whom I saw with the rope round his neck in the Duomo--the man
whose portrait Piero di Cosimo painted, grasping your arm as he saw him
grasp it the day the French entered, the day you first wore the armour."

"And where is he now, pray?" said Tito, still pale, but governing
himself.

"He was lying lifeless in the street from starvation," said Romola.  "I
revived him with bread and wine.  I brought him to our door, but he
refused to come in.  Then I gave him some money, and he went away
without telling me anything.  But he had found out that I was your wife.
Who is he?"

"A man, half mad, half imbecile, who was once my father's servant in
Greece, and who has a rancorous hatred towards me because I got him
dismissed for theft.  Now you have the whole mystery, and the further
satisfaction of knowing that I am again in danger of assassination.  The
fact of my wearing the armour, about which you seem to have thought so
much, must have led you to infer that I was in danger from this man.
Was that the reason you chose to cultivate his acquaintance and invite
him into the house?"

Romola was mute.  To speak was only like rushing with bare breast
against a shield.

Tito moved from his leaning posture, slowly took off his cap and mantle,
and pushed back his hair.  He was collecting himself for some final
words.  And Romola stood upright looking at him as she might have looked
at some on-coming deadly force, to be met only by silent endurance.

"We need not refer to these matters again, Romola," he said, precisely
in the same tone as that in which he had spoken at first.  "It is enough
if you will remember that the next time your generous ardour leads you
to interfere in political affairs, you are likely, not to save any one
from danger, but to be raising scaffolds and setting houses on fire.
You are not yet a sufficiently ardent Piagnone to believe that Messer
Bernardo del Nero is the prince of darkness, and Messer Francesco Valori
the archangel Michael.  I think I need demand no promise from you?"

"I have understood you too well, Tito."

"It is enough," he said, leaving the room.

Romola turned round with despair in her face and sank into her seat.  "O
God, I have tried--I cannot help it.  We shall always be divided."
Those words passed silently through her mind.  "Unless," she said aloud,
as if some sudden vision had startled her into speech--"unless misery
should come and join us!"

Tito, too, had a new thought in his mind after he had closed the door
behind him.  With the project of leaving Florence as soon as his life
there had become a high enough stepping-stone to a life elsewhere,
perhaps at Rome or Milan, there was now for the first, time associated a
desire to be free from Romola, and to leave her behind him.  She had
ceased to belong to the desirable furniture of his life: there was no
possibility of an easy relation between them without genuineness on his
part.  Genuineness implied confession of the past, and confession
involved a change of purpose.  But Tito had as little bent that way as a
leopard has to lap milk when its teeth are grown.  From all relations
that were not easy and agreeable, we know that Tito shrank: why should
he cling to them?

And Romola had made his relations difficult with others besides herself.
He had had a troublesome interview with Dolfo Spini, who had come back
in a rage after an ineffectual soaking with rain and long waiting in
ambush, and that scene between Romola and himself at Nello's door, once
reported in Spini's ear, might be a seed of something more unmanageable
than suspicion.  But now, at least, he believed that he had mastered
Romola by a terror which appealed to the strongest forces of her nature.
He had alarmed her affection and her conscience by the shadowy image of
consequences; he had arrested her intellect by hanging before it the
idea of a hopeless complexity in affairs which defied any moral
judgment.

Yet Tito was not at ease.  The world was not yet quite cushioned with
velvet, and, if it had been, he could not have abandoned himself to that
softness with thorough enjoyment; for before he went out again this
evening he put on his coat of chain-armour.



CHAPTER FORTY NINE.

THE PYRAMID OF VANITIES.

The wintry days passed for Romola as the white ships pass one who is
standing lonely on the shore--passing in silence and sameness, yet each
bearing a hidden burden of coming change.  Tito's hint had mingled so
much dread with her interest in the progress of public affairs that she
had begun to court ignorance rather than knowledge.  The threatening
German Emperor was gone again; and, in other ways besides, the position
of Florence was alleviated; but so much distress remained that Romola's
active duties were hardly diminished, and in these, as usual, her mind
found a refuge from its doubt.

She dared not rejoice that the relief which had come in extremity and
had appeared to justify the policy of the Frate's party was making that
party so triumphant, that Francesco Valori, hot-tempered chieftain of
the Piagnoni, had been elected Gonfaloniere at the beginning of the
year, and was making haste to have as much of his own liberal way as
possible during his two months of power.  That seemed for the moment
like a strengthening of the party most attached to freedom, and a
reinforcement of protection to Savonarola; but Romola was now alive to
every suggestion likely to deepen her foreboding, that whatever the
present might be, it was only an unconscious brooding over the mixed
germs of Change which might any day become tragic.  And already by
Carnival time, a little after mid-February, her presentiment was
confirmed by the signs of a very decided change: the Mediceans had
ceased to be passive, and were openly exerting themselves to procure the
election of Bernardo del Nero as the new Gonfaloniere.

On the last day of the Carnival, between ten and eleven in the morning,
Romola walked out, according to promise, towards the Corso degli
Albizzi, to fetch her cousin Brigida, that they might both be ready to
start from the Via de' Bardi early in the afternoon, and take their
places at a window which Tito had had reserved for them in the Piazza
della Signoria, where there was to be a scene of so new and striking a
sort, that all Florentine eyes must desire to see it.  For the Piagnoni
were having their own way thoroughly about the mode of keeping the
Carnival.  In vain Dolfo Spini and his companions had struggled to get
up the dear old masques and practical jokes, well spiced with indecency.
Such things were not to be in a city where Christ had been declared
king.

Romola set out in that languid state of mind with which every one enters
on a long day of sight-seeing purely for the sake of gratifying a child,
or some dear childish friend.  The day was certainly an epoch in
carnival-keeping; but this phase of reform had not touched her
enthusiasm: and she did not know that it was an epoch in her own life
when _another_ lot would begin to be no longer secretly but visibly
entwined with her own.

She chose to go through the great Piazza that she might take a first
survey of the unparalleled sight there while she was still alone.
Entering it from the south, she saw something monstrous and
many-coloured in the shape of a pyramid, or, rather, like a huge
fir-tree, sixty feet high, with shelves on the branches, widening and
widening towards the base till they reached a circumference of eighty
yards.  The Piazza was full of life: slight young figures, in white
garments, with olive wreaths on their heads, were moving to and fro
about the base of the pyramidal tree, carrying baskets full of
bright-coloured things; and maturer forms, some in the monastic frock,
some in the loose tunics and dark-red caps of artists, were helping and
examining, or else retreating to various points in the distance to
survey the wondrous whole: while a considerable group, amongst whom
Romola recognised Piero di Cosimo, standing on the marble steps of
Orgagna's Loggia, seemed to be keeping aloof in discontent and scorn.

Approaching nearer, she paused to look at the multifarious objects
ranged in gradation from the base to the summit of the pyramid.  There
were tapestries and brocades of immodest design, pictures and sculptures
held too likely to incite to vice; there were boards and tables for all
sorts of games, playing-cards along with the blocks for printing them,
dice, and other apparatus for gambling; there were worldly music-books,
and musical instruments in all the pretty varieties of lute, drum,
cymbal, and trumpet; there were masks and masquerading-dresses used in
the old Carnival shows; there were handsome copies of Ovid, Boccaccio,
Petrarca, Pulci, and other books of a vain or impure sort; there were
all the implements of feminine vanity--rouge-pots, false hair, mirrors,
perfumes, powders, and transparent veils intended to provoke inquisitive
glances: lastly, at the very summit, there was the unflattering effigy
of a probably mythical Venetian merchant, who was understood to have
offered a heavy sum for this collection of marketable abominations, and,
soaring above him in surpassing ugliness, the symbolic figure of the old
debauched Carnival.

This was the preparation for a new sort of bonfire--the Burning of
Vanities.  Hidden in the interior of the pyramid was a plentiful store
of dry fuel and gunpowder; and on this last day of the festival, at
evening, the pile of vanities was to be set ablaze to the sound of
trumpets, and the ugly old Carnival was to tumble into the flames amid
the songs of reforming triumph.

This crowning act of the new festivities could hardly have been prepared
but for a peculiar organisation which had been started by Savonarola two
years before.  The mass of the Florentine boyhood and youth was no
longer left to its own genial promptings towards street mischief and
crude dissoluteness.  Under the training of Fra Domenico, a sort of
lieutenant to Savonarola, lads and striplings, the hope of Florence,
were to have none but pure words on their lips, were to have a zeal for
Unseen Good that should put to shame the lukewarmness of their elders,
and were to know no pleasures save of an angelic sort--singing divine
praises and walking in white robes.  It was for them that the ranges of
seats had been raised high against the walls of the Duomo; and they had
been used to hear Savonarola appeal to them as the future glory of a
city specially appointed to do the work of God.

These fresh-cheeked troops were the chief agents in the regenerated
merriment of the new Carnival, which was a sort of sacred parody of the
old.  Had there been bonfires in the old time?  There was to be a
bonfire now, consuming impurity from off the earth.  Had there been
symbolic processions?  There were to be processions now, but the symbols
were to be white robes and red crosses and olive wreaths--emblems of
peace and innocent gladness--and the banners and images held aloft were
to tell the triumphs of goodness.  Had there been dancing in a ring
under the open sky of the Piazza, to the sound of choral voices chanting
loose songs?  There was to be dancing in a ring now, but dancing of
monks and laity in fraternal love and divine joy, and the music was to
be the music of hymns.  As for the collections from street passengers,
they were to be greater than ever--not for gross and superfluous:
suppers, but--for the benefit of the hungry and needy; and, besides,
there was the collecting of the _Anathema_, or the Vanities to be laid
on the great pyramidal bonfire.

Troops of young inquisitors went from house to house on this exciting
business of asking that the Anathema should be given up to them.
Perhaps, after the more avowed vanities had been surrendered, Madonna,
at the head of the household, had still certain little reddened balls
brought from the Levant, intended to produce on a sallow cheek a sudden
bloom of the most ingenuous falsity?  If so, let her bring them down and
cast them into the basket of doom.  Or, perhaps, she had ringlets and
coils of "dead hair?"--if so, let her bring them to the streetdoor, not
on her head, but in her hands, and publicly renounce the Anathema which
hid the respectable signs of age under a ghastly mockery of youth.  And,
in reward, she would hear fresh young voices pronounce a blessing on her
and her house.

The beardless inquisitors, organised into little regiments, doubtless
took to their work very willingly.  To coerce people by shame, or other
spiritual pelting, into the giving up of things it will probably vex
them to part with, is a form of piety to which the boyish mind is most
readily converted; and if some obstinately wicked men got enraged and
threatened the whip or the cudgel, this also was exciting.  Savonarola
himself evidently felt about the training of these boys the difficulty
weighing on all minds with noble yearnings towards great ends, yet with
that imperfect perception of means which forces a resort to some
supernatural constraining influence as the only sure hope.  The
Florentine youth had had very evil habits and foul tongues: it seemed at
first an unmixed blessing when they were got to shout "_Viva Gesu_!"
But Savonarola was forced at last to say from the pulpit, "There is a
little too much shouting of `_Viva Gesu_!'  This constant utterance of
sacred words brings them into contempt.  Let me have no more of that
shouting till the next Festa."

Nevertheless, as the long stream of white-robed youthfulness, with its
little red crosses and olive wreaths, had gone to the Duomo at dawn this
morning to receive the communion from the hands of Savonarola, it was a
sight of beauty; and, doubtless, many of those young souls were laying
up memories of hope and awe that might save them from ever resting in a
merely vulgar view of their work as men and citizens.  There is no kind
of conscious obedience that is not an advance on lawlessness, and these
boys became the generation of men who fought greatly and endured greatly
in the last struggle of their Republic.  Now, in the intermediate hours
between the early communion and dinner-time, they were making their last
perambulations to collect alms and vanities, and this was why Romola saw
the slim white figures moving to and fro about the base of the great
pyramid.

"What think you of this folly, Madonna Romola?" said a brusque voice
close to her ear.  "Your Piagnoni will make _l'inferno_ a pleasant
prospect to us, if they are to carry things their own way on earth.
It's enough to fetch a cudgel over the mountains to see painters, like
Lorenzo di Credi and young Baccio there, helping to burn colour out of
life in this fashion."

"My good Piero," said Romola, looking up and smiling at the grim man,
"even you must be glad to see some of these things burnt.  Look at those
gewgaws and wigs and rouge-pots: I have heard you talk as indignantly
against those things as Fra Girolamo himself."

"What then?" said Piero, turning round on her sharply.  "I never said a
woman should make a black patch of herself against the background.  Va!
Madonna Antigone, it's a shame for a woman with your hair and shoulders
to run into such nonsense--leave it to women who are not worth painting.
What! the most holy Virgin herself has always been dressed well; that's
the doctrine of the Church:--talk of heresy, indeed!  And I should like
to know what the excellent Messer Bardo would have said to the burning
of the divine poets by these Frati, who are no better an imitation of
men than if they were onions with the bulbs uppermost.  Look at that
Petrarca sticking up beside a rouge-pot: do the idiots pretend that the
heavenly Laura was a painted harridan?  And Boccaccio, now: do you mean
to say, Madonna Romola--you who are fit to be a model for a wise Saint
Catherine of Egypt--do you mean to say you have never read the stories
of the immortal Messer Giovanni?"

"It is true I have read them, Piero," said Romola.  "Some of them a
great many times over, when I was a little girl.  I used to get the book
down when my father was asleep, so that I could read to myself."

"_Ebbene_?" said Piero, in a fiercely challenging tone.

"There are some things in them I do not want ever to forget," said
Romola; "but you must confess, Piero, that a great many of those stories
are only about low deceit for the lowest ends.  Men do not want books to
make them think lightly of vice, as if life were a vulgar joke.  And I
cannot blame Fra Girolamo for teaching that we owe our time to something
better."

"Yes, yes, it's very well to say so now you've read them," said Piero,
bitterly, turning on his heel and walking away from her.

Romola, too, walked on, smiling at Piero's innuendo, with a sort of
tenderness towards the old painter's anger, because she knew that her
father would have felt something like it.  For herself, she was
conscious of no inward collision with the strict and sombre view of
pleasure which tended to repress poetry in the attempt to repress vice.
Sorrow and joy have each their peculiar narrowness; and a religious
enthusiasm like Savonarola's which ultimately blesses mankind by giving
the soul a strong propulsion towards sympathy with pain, indignation
against wrong, and the subjugation of sensual desire, must always incur
the reproach of a great negation.  Romola's life had given her an
affinity for sadness which inevitably made her unjust towards merriment.
That subtle result of culture which we call Taste was subdued by the
need for deeper motive; just as the nicer demands of the palate are
annihilated by urgent hunger.  Moving habitually amongst scenes of
suffering, and carrying woman's heaviest disappointment in her heart,
the severity which allied itself with self-renouncing beneficent
strength had no dissonance for her.



CHAPTER FIFTY.

TESSA ABROAD AND AT HOME.

Another figure easily recognised by us--a figure not clad in black, but
in the old red, green, and white--was approaching the Piazza that
morning to see the Carnival.  She came from an opposite point, for Tessa
no longer lived on the hill of San Giorgio.  After what had happened
there with Baldassarre, Tito had thought it best for that and other
reasons to find her a new home, but still in a quiet airy quarter, in a
house bordering on the wide garden grounds north of the Porta Santa
Croce.

Tessa was not come out sight-seeing without special leave.  Tito had
been with her the evening before, and she had kept back the entreaty
which she felt to be swelling her heart and throat until she saw him in
a state of radiant ease, with one arm round the sturdy Lillo, and the
other resting gently on her own shoulder as she tried to make the tiny
Ninna steady on her legs.  She was sure then that the weariness with
which he had come in and flung himself into his chair had quite melted
away from his brow and lips.  Tessa had not been slow at learning a few
small stratagems by which she might avoid vexing Naldo and yet have a
little of her own way.  She could read nothing else, but she had learned
to read a good deal in her husband's face.

And certainly the charm of that bright, gentle-humoured Tito who woke up
under the Loggia de' Cerchi on a Lenten morning five years before, not
having yet given any hostages to deceit, never returned so nearly as in
the person of Naldo, seated in that straight-backed, carved arm-chair
which he had provided for his comfort when he came to see Tessa and the
children.  Tito himself was surprised at the growing sense of relief
which he felt in these moments.  No guile was needed towards Tessa: she
was too ignorant and too innocent to suspect him of anything.  And the
little voices calling him "Babbo" were very sweet in his ears for the
short while that he heard them.  When he thought of leaving Florence, he
never thought of leaving Tessa and the little ones behind.  He was very
fond of these round-cheeked, wide-eyed human things that clung about him
and knew no evil of him.  And wherever affection can spring, it is like
the green leaf and the blossom--pure, and breathing purity, whatever
soil it may grow in.  Poor Romola, with all her self-sacrificing effort,
was really helping to harden Tito's nature by chilling it with a
positive dislike which had beforehand seemed impossible in him; but
Tessa kept open the fountains of kindness.

"Ninna is very good without me now," began Tessa, feeling her request
rising very high in her throat, and letting Ninna seat herself on the
floor.  "I can leave her with Monna Lisa any time, and if she is in the
cradle and cries, Lillo is as sensible as can be--he goes and thumps
Monna Lisa."

Lillo, whose great dark eyes looked all the darker because his curls
were of a light-brown like his mother's, jumped off Babbo's knee, and
went forthwith to attest his intelligence by thumping Monna Lisa, who
was shaking her head slowly over her spinning at the other end of the
room.  "A wonderful boy!" said Tito, laughing.  "Isn't he?" said Tessa,
eagerly, getting a little closer to him; "and I might go and see the
Carnival to-morrow, just for an hour or two, mightn't I?"

"Oh, you wicked pigeon!" said Tito, pinching her cheek; "those are your
longings, are they?  What have you to do with carnivals now you are an
old woman with two children?"

"But old women like to see things," said Tessa, her lower lip hanging a
little.  "Monna Lisa said she should like to go, only she's so deaf she
can't hear what is behind her, and she thinks we couldn't take care of
both the children."

"No, indeed, Tessa," said Tito, looking rather grave, "you must not
think of taking the children into the crowded streets, else I shall be
angry."

"But I have never been into the Piazza without leave," said Tessa, in a
frightened, pleading tone, "since the Holy Saturday, and I think Nofri
is dead, for you know the poor _madre_ died; and I shall never forget
the Carnival I saw once; it was so pretty--all roses and a king and
queen under them--and singing.  I liked it better than the San
Giovanni."

"But there's nothing like that now, my Tessa.  They are going to make a
bonfire in the Piazza--that's all.  But I cannot let you go out by
yourself in the evening."

"Oh no, no!  I don't want to go in the evening.  I only want to go and
see the procession by daylight.  There _will_ be a procession--is it not
true?"

"Yes, after a sort," said Tito, "as lively as a flight of cranes.  You
must not expect roses and glittering kings and queens, my Tessa.
However, I suppose any string of people to be called a procession will
please your blue eyes.  And there's a thing they have raised in the
Piazza de' Signori for the bonfire.  You may like to see that.  But come
home early, and look like a grave little old woman; and if you see any
men with feathers and swords, keep out of their way: they are very
fierce, and like to cut old women's heads off."

"Santa Madonna! where do they come from?  Ah! you are laughing; it is
not so bad.  But I will keep away from them.  Only," Tessa went on in a
whisper, putting her lips near Naldo's ear, "if I might take Lillo with
me!  He is very sensible."

"But who will thump Monna Lisa then, if she doesn't hear?" said Tito,
finding it difficult not to laugh, but thinking it necessary to look
serious.  "No, Tessa, you could not take care of Lillo if you got into a
crowd, and he's too heavy for you to carry him."

"It is true," said Tessa, rather sadly, "and he likes to run away.  I
forgot that.  Then I will go alone.  But now look at Ninna--you have not
looked at her enough."

Ninna was a blue-eyed thing, at the tottering, tumbling age--a fair
solid, which, like a loaded die, found its base with a constancy that
warranted prediction.  Tessa went to snatch her up, and when Babbo was
paying due attention to the recent teeth and other marvels, she said, in
a whisper, "And shall I buy some confetti for the children?"

Tito drew some small coins from his scarsella, and poured them into her
palm.

"That will buy no end," said Tessa, delighted at this abundance.  "I
shall not mind going without Lillo so much, if I bring him something."

So Tessa set out in the morning towards the great Piazza where the
bonfire was to be.  She did not think the February breeze cold enough to
demand further covering than her green woollen dress.  A mantle would
have been oppressive, for it would have hidden a new necklace and a new
clasp, mounted with silver, the only ornamental presents Tito had ever
made her.  Tessa did not think at all of showing her figure, for no one
had ever told her it was pretty; but she was quite sure that her
necklace and clasp were of the prettiest sort ever worn by the richest
contadina, and she arranged her white hood over her head so that the
front of her necklace might be well displayed.  These ornaments, she
considered, must inspire respect for her as the wife of some one who
could afford to buy them.

She tripped along very cheerily in the February sunshine, thinking much
of the purchases for the little ones, with which she was to fill her
small basket, and not thinking at all of any one who might be observing
her.  Yet her descent from her upper storey into the street had been
watched, and she was being kept in sight as she walked by a person who
had often waited in vain to see if it were not Tessa who lived in that
house to which he had more than once dogged Tito.  Baldassarre was
carrying a package of yarn: he was constantly employed in that way, as a
means of earning his scanty bread, and keeping the sacred fire of
vengeance alive; and he had come out of his way this morning, as he had
often done before, that he might pass by the house to which he had
followed Tito in the evening.  His long imprisonment had so intensified
his timid suspicion and his belief in some diabolic fortune favouring
Tito, that he had not dared to pursue him, except under cover of a crowd
or of the darkness; he felt, with instinctive horror, that if Tito's
eyes fell upon him, he should again be held up to obloquy, again be
dragged away his weapon would be taken from him, and he should be cast
helpless into a prison-cell.  His fierce purpose had become as stealthy
as a serpent's, which depends for its prey on one dart of the fang.
Justice was weak and unfriended; and he could not hear again the voice
that pealed the promise of vengeance in the Duomo; he had been there
again and again, but that voice, too, had apparently been stifled by
cunning strong-armed wickedness.  For a long while, Baldassarre's ruling
thought was to ascertain whether Tito still wore the armour, for now at
last his fainting hope would have been contented with a successful stab
on this side the grave; but he would never risk his precious knife
again.  It was a weary time he had had to wait for the chance of
answering this question by touching Tito's back in the press of the
street.  Since then, the knowledge that the sharp steel was useless, and
that he had no hope but in some new device, had fallen with leaden
weight on his enfeebled mind.  A dim vision of winning one of those two
wives to aid him came before him continually, and continually slid away.
The wife who had lived on the hill was no longer there.  If he could
find her again, he might grasp some thread of a project, and work his
way to more clearness.

And this morning he had succeeded.  He was quite certain now where this
wife lived, and as he walked, bent a little under his burden of yarn,
yet keeping the green and white figure in sight, his mind was dwelling
upon her and her circumstances as feeble eyes dwell on lines and
colours, trying to interpret them into consistent significance.

Tessa had to pass through various long streets without seeing any other
sign of the Carnival than unusual groups of the country people in their
best garments, and that disposition in everybody to chat and loiter
which marks the early hours of a holiday, before the spectacle has
begun.  Presently, in her disappointed search for remarkable objects,
her eyes fell on a man with a pedlar's basket before him, who seemed to
be selling nothing but little red crosses to all the passengers.  A
little red cross would be pretty to hang up over her bed; it would also
help to keep off harm, and would perhaps make Ninna stronger.  Tessa
went to the other side of the street that she might ask the pedlar the
price of the crosses, fearing that they would cost a little too much for
her to spare from her purchase of sweets.  The pedlar's back had been
turned towards her hitherto, but when she came near him she recognised
an old acquaintance of the Mercato, Bratti Ferravecchi, and, accustomed
to feel that she was to avoid old acquaintances, she turned away again
and passed to the other side of the street.  But Bratti's eye was too
well practised in looking out at the corner after possible customers,
for her movement to have escaped him, and she was presently arrested by
a tap on the arm from one of the red crosses.

"Young woman," said Bratti, as she unwillingly turned her head, "you
come from some castello a good way off, it seems to me, else you'd never
think of walking about, this blessed Carnival, without a red cross in
your hand.  Santa Madonna!  Four white quattrini is a small price to pay
for your soul--prices rise in purgatory, let me tell you."

"Oh, I should like one," said Tessa, hastily, "but I couldn't spare four
white quattrini."

Bratti had at first regarded Tessa too abstractedly as a mere customer
to look at her with any scrutiny, but when she began to speak he
exclaimed, "By the head of San Giovanni, it must be the little Tessa,
and looking as fresh as a ripe apple!  What! you've done none the worse,
then, for running away from father Nofri?  You were in the right of it,
for he goes on crutches now, and a crabbed fellow with crutches is
dangerous; he can reach across the house and beat a woman as he sits."

"I'm married," said Tessa, rather demurely, remembering Naldo's command
that she should behave with gravity; "and my husband takes great care of
me."

"Ah, then, you've fallen on your feet!  Nofri said you were
good-for-nothing vermin; but what then?  An ass may bray a good while
before he shakes the stars down.  I always said you did well to run
away, and it isn't often Bratti's in the wrong.  Well, and so you've got
a husband and plenty of money?  Then you'll never think much of giving
four white quattrini for a red cross.  I get no profit; but what with
the famine and the new religion, all other merchandise is gone down.
You live in the country where the chestnuts are plenty, eh?  You've
never wanted for polenta, I can see."

"No, I've never wanted anything," said Tessa, still on her guard.

"Then you can afford to buy a cross.  I got a Padre to bless them, and
you get blessing and all for four quattrini.  It isn't for the profit; I
hardly get a danaro by the whole lot.  But then they're holy wares, and
it's getting harder and harder work to see your way to Paradise: the
very Carnival is like Holy Week, and the least you can do to keep the
Devil from getting the upper hand is to buy a cross.  God guard you!
think what the Devil's tooth is!  You've seen him biting the man in San
Giovanni, I should hope?"

Tessa felt much teased and frightened.  "Oh, Bratti," she said, with a
discomposed face, "I want to buy a great many confetti: I've got little
Lillo and Ninna at home.  And nice coloured sweet things cost a great
deal.  And they will not like the cross so well, though I know it would
be good to have it."

"Come, then," said Bratti, fond of laying up a store of merits by
imagining possible extortions and then heroically renouncing them,
"since you're an old acquaintance, you shall have it for two quattrini.
It's making you a present of the cross, to say nothing of the blessing."

Tessa was reaching out her two quattrini with trembling hesitation, when
Bratti said abruptly, "Stop a bit!  Where do you live?"

"Oh, a long way off," she answered, almost automatically, being
preoccupied with her quattrini; "beyond San Ambrogio, in the Via
Piccola, at the top of the house where the wood is stacked below."

"Very good," said Bratti, in a patronising tone; "then I'll let you have
the cross on trust, and call for the money.  So you live inside the
gates?  Well, well, I shall be passing."

"No, no!" said Tessa, frightened lest Naldo should be angry at this
revival of an old acquaintance.  "I can spare the money.  Take it now."

"No," said Bratti, resolutely; "I'm not a hard-hearted pedlar.  I'll
call and see if you've got any rags, and you shall make a bargain.  See,
here's the cross: and there's Pippo's shop not far behind you: you can
go and fill your basket, and I must go and get mine empty.  _Addio,
piccina_."

Bratti went on his way, and Tessa, stimulated to change her money into
confetti before further accident, went into Pippo's shop, a little
fluttered by the thought that she had let Bratti know more about her
than her husband would approve.  There were certainly more dangers in
coming to see the Carnival than in staying at home; and she would have
felt this more strongly if she had known that the wicked old man, who
had wanted to kill her husband on the hill, was still keeping her in
sight.  But she had not noticed the man with the burden on his back.

The consciousness of having a small basketful of things to make the
children glad, dispersed her anxiety, and as she entered the Via de'
Libraj her face had its visual expression of childlike content.  And now
she thought there was really a procession coming, for she saw white
robes and a banner, and her heart began to palpitate with expectation.
She stood a little aside, but in that narrow street there was the
pleasure of being obliged to look very close.  The banner was pretty: it
was the Holy Mother with the Babe, whose love for her Tessa had believed
in more and more since she had had her babies; and the figures in white
had not only green wreaths on their heads, but little red crosses by
their side, which caused her some satisfaction that she also had her red
cross.  Certainly, they looked as beautiful as the angels on the clouds,
and to Tessa's mind they too had a background of cloud, like everything
else that came to her in life.  How and whence did they come?  She did
not mind much about knowing.  But one thing surprised her as newer than
wreaths and crosses; it was that some of the white figures carried
baskets between them.  What could the baskets be for?

But now they were very near, and, to her astonishment, they wheeled
aside and came straight up to her.  She trembled as she would have done
if Saint Michael in the picture had shaken his head at her, and was
conscious of nothing but terrified wonder till she saw close to her a
round boyish face, lower than her own, and heard a treble voice saying,
"Sister, you carry the Anathema about you.  Yield it up to the blessed
Gesu, and He will adorn you with the gems of His grace."

Tessa was only more frightened, understanding nothing.  Her first
conjecture settled on her basket of sweets.  They wanted that, these
alarming angels.  Oh dear, dear!  She looked down at it.

"No, sister," said a taller youth, pointing to her necklace and the
clasp of her belt, "it is those vanities that are the Anathema.  Take
off that necklace and unclasp that belt, that they may be burned in the
holy Bonfire of Vanities, and save _you_ from burning."

"It is the truth, my sister," said a still taller youth, evidently the
archangel of this band.  "Listen to these voices speaking the divine
message.  You already carry a red cross: let that be your only
adornment.  Yield up your necklace and belt, and you shall obtain
grace."

This was too much.  Tessa, overcome with awe, dared not say "no," but
she was equally unable to render up her beloved necklace and clasp.  Her
pouting lips were quivering, the tears rushed to her eyes, and a great
drop fell.  For a moment she ceased to see anything; she felt nothing
but confused terror and misery.  Suddenly a gentle hand was laid on her
arm, and a soft, wonderful voice, as if the Holy Madonna were speaking,
said, "Do not be afraid; no one shall harm you."

Tessa looked up and saw a lady in black, with a young heavenly face and
loving hazel eyes.  She had never seen any one like this lady before,
and under other circumstances might have had awestruck thoughts about
her; but now everything else was overcome by the sense that loving
protection was near her.  The tears only fell the faster, relieving her
swelling heart, as she looked up at the heavenly face, and, putting her
hand to her necklace, said sobbingly--

"I can't give them to be burnt.  My husband--he bought them for me--and
they are so pretty--and Ninna--oh, I wish I'd never come!"

"Do not ask her for them," said Romola, speaking to the white-robed boys
in a tone of mild authority.  "It answers no good end for people to give
up such things against their will.  That is not what Fra Girolamo
approves: he would have such things given up freely."

Madonna Romola's word was not to be resisted, and the white train moved
on.  They even moved with haste, as if some new object had caught their
eyes; and Tessa felt with bliss that they were gone, and that her
necklace and clasp were still with her.

"Oh, I will go back to the house," she said, still agitated; "I will go
nowhere else.  But if I should meet them again, and you not be there?"
she added, expecting everything from this heavenly lady.

"Stay a little," said Romola.  "Come with me under this doorway, and we
will hide the necklace and clasp, and then you will be in no danger."

She led Tessa under the archway, and said, "Now, can we find room for
your necklace and belt in your basket?  Ah! your basket is full of crisp
things that will break: let us be careful, and lay the heavy necklace
under them."

It was like a change in a dream to Tessa--the escape from nightmare into
floating safety and joy--to find herself taken care of by this lady, so
lovely, and powerful, and gentle.  She let Romola unfasten her necklace
and clasp, while she herself did nothing but look up at the face that
bent over her.

"They are sweets for Lillo and Ninna," she said, as Romola carefully
lifted up the light parcels in the basket, and placed the ornaments
below them.

"Those are your children?" said Romola, smiling.  "And you would rather
go home to them than see any more of the Carnival?  Else you have not
far to go to the Piazza de' Signori, and there you would see the pile
for the great bonfire."

"No, oh no!" said Tessa, eagerly; "I shall never like bonfires again.  I
will go back."

"You live at some castello, doubtless," said Romola, not waiting for an
answer.  "Towards which gate do you go?"

"Towards Por' Santa Croce."

"Come, then," said Romola, taking her by the hand and leading her to the
corner of a street nearly opposite.  "If you go down there," she said,
pausing, "you will soon be in a straight road.  And I must leave you
now, because some one else expects me.  You will not be frightened.
Your pretty things are quite safe now.  Addio."

"Addio, Madonna," said Tessa, almost in a whisper, not knowing what else
it would be right to say; and in an instant the heavenly lady was gone.
Tessa turned to catch a last glimpse, but she only saw the tall gliding
figure vanish round the projecting stonework.  So she went on her way in
wonder, longing to be once more safely housed with Monna Lisa,
undesirous of carnivals for evermore.

Baldassarre had kept Tessa in sight till the moment of her parting with
Romola: then he went away with his bundle of yarn.  It seemed to him
that he had discerned a clue which might guide him if he could only
grasp the necessary details firmly enough.  He had seen the two wives
together, and the sight had brought to his conceptions that vividness
which had been wanting before.  His power of imagining facts needed to
be reinforced continually by the senses.  The tall wife was the noble
and rightful wife; she had the blood in her that would be readily
kindled to resentment; she would know what scholarship was, and how it
might lie locked in by the obstructions of the stricken body, like a
treasure buried by earthquake.  She could believe him: she would be
_inclined_ to believe him, if he proved to her that her husband was
unfaithful.  Women cared about that: they would take vengeance for that.
If this wife of Tito's loved him, she would have a sense of injury
which Baldassarre's mind dwelt on with keen longing, as if it would be
the strength of another Will added to his own, the strength of another
mind to form devices.

Both these wives had been kind to Baldassarre, and their acts towards
him, being bound up with the very image of them, had not vanished from
his memory; yet the thought of their pain could not present itself to
him as a check.  To him it seemed that pain was the order of the world
for all except the hard and base.  If any were innocent, if any were
noble, where could the utmost gladness lie for them?  Where it lay for
him--in unconquerable hatred and triumphant vengeance.  But he must be
cautious: he must watch this wife in the Via de' Bardi, and learn more
of her; for even here frustration was possible.  There was no power for
him now but in patience.



CHAPTER FIFTY ONE.

MONNA BRIGIDA'S CONVERSION.

When Romola said that some one else expected her, she meant her cousin
Brigida, but she was far from suspecting how much that good kinswoman
was in need of her.  Returning together towards the Piazza, they had
descried the company of youths coming to a stand before Tessa, and when
Romola, having approached near enough to see the simple little
contadina's distress, said, "Wait for me a moment, cousin," Monna
Brigida said hastily, "Ah, I will not go on: come for me to Boni's
shop,--I shall go back there."

The truth was, Monna Brigida had a consciousness on the one hand of
certain "vanities" carried on her person, and on the other of a growing
alarm lest the Piagnoni should be right in holding that rouge, and false
hair, and pearl embroidery, endamaged the soul.  Their serious view of
things filled the air like an odour; nothing seemed to have exactly the
same flavour as it used to have; and there was the dear child Romola, in
her youth and beauty, leading a life that was uncomfortably suggestive
of rigorous demands on woman.  A widow at fifty-five whose satisfaction
has been largely drawn from what she thinks of her own person, and what
she believes others think of it, requires a great fund of imagination to
keep her spirits buoyant.  And Monna Brigida had begun to have frequent
struggles at her toilet.  If her soul would prosper better without them,
was it really worth while to put on the rouge and the braids?  But when
she lifted up the hand-mirror and saw a sallow face with baggy cheeks,
and crows'-feet that were not to be dissimulated by any simpering of the
lips--when she parted her grey hair, and let it lie in simple Piagnone
fashion round her face, her courage failed.  Monna Berta would certainly
burst out laughing at her, and call her an old hag, and as Monna Berta
was really only fifty-two, she had a superiority which would make the
observation cutting.  Every woman who was not a Piagnone would give a
shrug at the sight of her, and the men would accost her as if she were
their grandmother.  Whereas, at fifty-five a woman was not so very old--
she only required making up a little.  So the rouge and the braids and
the embroidered berretta went on again, and Monna Brigida was satisfied
with the accustomed effect; as for her neck, if she covered it up,
people might suppose it was too old to show, and, on the contrary, with
the necklaces round it, it looked better than Monna Berta's.  This very
day, when she was preparing for the Piagnone Carnival, such a struggle
had occurred, and the conflicting fears and longings which caused the
struggle, caused her to turn back and seek refuge in the druggist's shop
rather than encounter the collectors of the Anathema when Romola was not
by her side.  But Monna Brigida was not quite rapid enough in her
retreat.  She had been descried, even before she turned away, by the
white-robed boys in the rear of those who wheeled round towards Tessa,
and the willingness with which Tessa was given up was, perhaps, slightly
due to the fact that part of the troop had already accosted a personage
carrying more markedly upon her the dangerous weight of the Anathema.
It happened that several of this troop were at the youngest age taken
into peculiar training; and a small fellow of ten, his olive wreath
resting above cherubic cheeks and wide brown eyes, his imagination
really possessed with a hovering awe at existence as something in which
great consequences impended on being good or bad, his longings
nevertheless running in the direction of mastery and mischief, was the
first to reach Monna Brigida and place himself across her path.  She
felt angry, and looked for an open door, but there was not one at hand,
and by attempting to escape now, she would only make things worse.  But
it was not the cherubic-faced young one who first addressed her; it was
a youth of fifteen, who held one handle of a wide basket.

"Venerable mother!" he began, "the blessed Jesus commands you to give up
the Anathema which you carry upon you.  That cap embroidered with
pearls, those jewels that fasten up your false hair--let them be given
up and sold for the poor; and cast the hair itself away from you, as a
lie that is only fit for burning.  Doubtless, too, you have other jewels
under your silk mantle."

"Yes, lady," said the youth at the other handle, who had many of Fra
Girolamo's phrases by heart, "they are too heavy for you: they are
heavier than a millstone, and are weighting you for perdition.  Will you
adorn yourself with the hunger of the poor, and be proud to carry God's
curse upon your head?"

"In truth you are old, buona madre," said the cherubic boy, in a sweet
soprano.  "You look very ugly with the red on your cheeks and that black
glistening hair, and those fine things.  It is only Satan who can like
to see you.  Your Angel is sorry.  He wants you to rub away the red."

The little fellow snatched a soft silk scarf from the basket, and held
it towards Monna Brigida, that she might use it as her guardian angel
desired.  Her anger and mortification were fast giving way to spiritual
alarm.  Monna Berta and that cloud of witnesses, highly-dressed society
in general, were not looking at her, and she was surrounded by young
monitors, whose white robes, and wreaths, and red crosses, and dreadful
candour, had something awful in their unusualness.  Her Franciscan
confessor, Fra Cristoforo, of Santa Croce, was not at hand to reinforce
her distrust of Dominican teaching, and she was helplessly possessed and
shaken by a vague sense that a supreme warning was come to her.
Unvisited by the least suggestion of any other course that was open to
her, she took the scarf that was held out, and rubbed her cheeks, with
trembling submissiveness.

"It is well, madonna," said the second youth.  "It is a holy beginning.
And when you have taken those vanities from your head, the dew of
heavenly grace will descend on it."  The infusion of mischief was
getting stronger, and putting his hand to one of the jewelled pins that
fastened her braids to the berretta, he drew it out.  The heavy black
plait fell down over Monna Brigida's face, and dragged the rest of the
head-gear forward.  It was a new reason for not hesitating: she put up
her hands hastily, undid the other fastenings, and flung down into the
basket of doom her beloved crimson-velvet berretta, with all its
unsurpassed embroidery of seed-pearls, and stood an unrouged woman, with
grey hair pushed backward from a face where certain deep lines of age
had triumphed over _embonpoint_.

But the berretta was not allowed to lie in the basket.  With impish zeal
the youngsters lifted it, and held it up pitilessly, with the false hair
dangling.

"See, venerable mother," said the taller youth, "what ugly lies you have
delivered yourself from!  And now you look like the blessed Saint Anna,
the mother of the Holy Virgin."

Thoughts of going into a convent forthwith, and never showing herself in
the world again, were rushing through Monna Brigida's mind.  There was
nothing possible for her but to take care of her soul.

Of course, there were spectators laughing: she had no need to look round
to assure herself of that.  Well! it would, perhaps, be better to be
forced to think more of Paradise.  But at the thought that the dear
accustomed world was no longer in her choice, there gathered some of
those hard tears which just moisten elderly eyes, and she could see but
dimly a large rough hand holding a red cross, which was suddenly thrust
before her over the shoulders of the boys, while a strong guttural voice
said--

"Only four quattrini, madonna, blessing and all!  Buy it.  You'll find a
comfort in it now your wig's gone.  Deh! what are we sinners doing all
our lives?  Making soup in a basket, and getting nothing but the scum
for our stomachs.  Better buy a blessing, madonna!  Only four quattrini;
the profit is not so much as the smell of a danaro, and it goes to the
poor."

Monna Brigida, in dim-eyed confusion, was proceeding to the further
submission of reaching money from her embroidered scarsella, at present
hidden by her silk mantle, when the group round her, which she had not
yet entertained the idea of escaping, opened before a figure as welcome
as an angel loosing prison-bolts.

"Romola, look at me!" said Monna Brigida, in a piteous tone, putting out
both her hands.

The white troop was already moving away, with a slight consciousness
that its zeal about the head-gear had been superabundant enough to
afford a dispensation from any further demand for penitential offerings.

"Dear cousin, don't be distressed," said Romola, smitten with pity, yet
hardly able to help smiling at the sudden apparition of her kinswoman in
a genuine, natural guise, strangely contrasted with all memories of her.
She took the black drapery from her own head, and threw it over Monna
Brigida's.  "There," she went on soothingly, "no one will remark you
now.  We will turn down the Via del Palagio and go straight to our
house."

They hastened away, Monna Brigida grasping Romola's hand tightly, as if
to get a stronger assurance of her being actually there.

"Ah, my Romola, my dear child!" said the short fat woman, hurrying with
frequent steps to keep pace with the majestic young figure beside her;
"what an old scarecrow I am!  I must be good--I mean to be good!"

"Yes, yes; buy a cross!" said the guttural voice, while the rough hand
was thrust once more before Monna Brigida: for Bratti was not to be
abashed by Romola's presence into renouncing a probable customer, and
had quietly followed up their retreat.  "Only four quattrini, blessing
and all--and if there was any profit, it would all go to the poor."

Monna Brigida would have been compelled to pause, even if she had been
in a less submissive mood.  She put up one hand deprecatingly to arrest
Romola's remonstrance, and with the other reached out a grosso, worth
many white quattrini, saying, in an entreating tone--

"Take it, good man, and begone."

"You're in the right, madonna," said Bratti, taking the coin quickly,
and thrusting the cross into her hand; "I'll not offer you change, for I
might as well rob you of a mass.  What! we must all be scorched a
little, but you'll come off the easier; better fall from the window than
the roof.  A good Easter and a good year to you!"

"Well, Romola," cried Monna Brigida, pathetically, as Bratti left them,
"if I'm to be a Piagnone it's no matter how I look!"

"Dear cousin," said Romola, smiling at her affectionately, "you don't
know how much better you look than you ever did before.  I see now how
good-natured your face is, like yourself.  That red and finery seemed to
thrust themselves forward and hide expression.  Ask our Piero or any
other painter if he would not rather paint your portrait now than
before.  I think all lines of the human face have something either
touching or grand, unless they seem to come from low passions.  How fine
old men are, like my godfather!  Why should not old women look grand and
simple?"

"Yes, when one gets to be sixty, my Romola," said Brigida, relapsing a
little; "but I'm only fifty-five, and Monna Berta, and everybody--but
it's no use: I will be good, like you.  Your mother, if she'd been
alive, would have been as old as I am; we were cousins together.  One
_must_ either die or get old.  But it doesn't matter about being old, if
one's a Piagnone."



CHAPTER FIFTY TWO.

A PROPHETESS.

The incidents of that Carnival day seemed to Romola to carry no other
personal consequences to her than the new care of supporting poor cousin
Brigida in her fluctuating resignation to age and grey hairs; but they
introduced a Lenten time in which she was kept at a high pitch of mental
excitement and active effort.

Bernardo del Nero had been elected Gonfaloniere.  By great exertions the
Medicean party had so far triumphed, and that triumph had deepened
Romola's presentiment of some secretly-prepared scheme likely to ripen
either into success or betrayal during these two months of her
godfather's authority.  Every morning the dim daybreak as it peered into
her room seemed to be that haunting fear coming back to her.  Every
morning the fear went with her as she passed through the streets on her
way to the early sermon in the Duomo: but there she gradually lost the
sense of its chill presence, as men lose the dread of death in the clash
of battle.

In the Duomo she felt herself sharing in a passionate conflict which had
wider relations than any enclosed within the walls of Florence.  For
Savonarola was preaching--preaching the last course of Lenten sermons he
was ever allowed to finish in the Duomo: he knew that excommunication
was imminent, and he had reached the point of defying it.  He held up
the condition of the Church in the terrible mirror of his unflinching
speech, which called things by their right names and dealt in no polite
periphrases; he proclaimed with heightening confidence the advent of
renovation--of a moment when there would be a general revolt against
corruption.  As to his own destiny, he seemed to have a double and
alternating prevision: sometimes he saw himself taking a glorious part
in that revolt, sending forth a voice that would be heard through all
Christendom, and making the dead body of the Church tremble into new
life, as the body of Lazarus trembled when the Divine voice pierced the
sepulchre; sometimes he saw no prospect for himself but persecution and
martyrdom:--this life for him was only a vigil, and only after death
would come the dawn.

The position was one which must have had its impressiveness for all
minds that were not of the dullest order, even if they were inclined, as
Macchiavelli was, to interpret the Frate's character by a key that
presupposed no loftiness.  To Romola, whose kindred ardour gave her a
firm belief in Savonarola's genuine greatness of purpose, the crisis was
as stirring as if it had been part of her personal lot.  It blent itself
as an exalting memory with all her daily labours; and those labours were
calling not only for difficult perseverance, but for new courage.
Famine had never yet taken its flight from Florence, and all distress,
by its long continuance, was getting harder to bear; disease was
spreading in the crowded city, and the Plague was expected.  As Romola
walked, often in weariness, among the sick, the hungry, and the
murmuring, she felt it good to be inspired by something more than her
pity--by the belief in a heroism struggling for sublime ends, towards
which the daily action of her pity could only tend feebly, as the dews
that freshen the weedy ground to-day tend to prepare an unseen harvest
in the years to come.

But that mighty music which stirred her in the Duomo was not without its
jarring notes.  Since those first days of glowing hope when the Frate,
seeing the near triumph of good in the reform of the Republic and the
coming of the French deliverer, had preached peace, charity, and
oblivion of political differences, there had been a marked change of
conditions: political intrigue had been too obstinate to allow of the
desired oblivion; the belief in the French deliverer, who had turned his
back on his high mission, seemed to have wrought harm; and hostility,
both on a petty and on a grand scale, was attacking the Prophet with new
weapons and new determination.

It followed that the spirit of contention and self-vindication pierced
more and more conspicuously in his sermons; that he was urged to meet
the popular demands not only by increased insistance and detail
concerning visions and private revelations, but by a tone of defiant
confidence against objectors; and from having denounced the desire for
the miraculous, and declared that miracles had no relation to true
faith, he had come to assert that at the right moment the Divine power
would attest the truth of his prophetic preaching by a miracle.  And
continually, in the rapid transitions of excited feeling, as the vision
of triumphant good receded behind the actual predominance of evil, the
threats of coming vengeance against vicious tyrants and corrupt priests
gathered some impetus from personal exasperation, as well as from
indignant zeal.

In the career of a great public orator who yields himself to the
inspiration of the moment, that conflict of selfish and unselfish
emotion which in most men is hidden in the chamber of the soul, is
brought into terrible evidence: the language of the inner voices is
written out in letters of fire.

But if the tones of exasperation jarred on Romola, there was often
another member of Fra Girolamo's audience to whom they were the only
thrilling tones, like the vibration of deep bass notes to the deaf.
Baldassarre had found out that the wonderful Frate was preaching again,
and as often as he could, he went to hear the Lenten sermon, that he
might drink in the threats of a voice which seemed like a power on the
side of justice.  He went the more because he had seen that Romola went
too; for he was waiting and watching for a time when not only outward
circumstances, but his own varying mental state, would mark the right
moment for seeking an interview with her.  Twice Romola had caught sight
of his face in the Duomo--once when its dark glance was fixed on hers.
She wished not to see it again, and yet she looked for it, as men look
for the reappearance of a portent.  But any revelation that might be yet
to come about this old man was a subordinate fear now: it referred, she
thought, only to the past, and her anxiety was almost absorbed by the
present.

Yet the stirring Lent passed by; April, the second and final month of
her godfather's supreme authority, was near its close; and nothing had
occurred to fulfil her presentiment.  In the public mind, too, there had
been fears, and rumours had spread from Home of a menacing activity on
the part of Piero de' Medici; but in a few days the suspected Bernardo
would go out of power.

Romola was trying to gather some courage from the review of her futile
fears, when on the twenty-seventh, as she was walking out on her usual
errands of mercy in the afternoon, she was met by a messenger from
Camilla Rucellai, chief among the feminine seers of Florence, desiring
her presence forthwith on matters of the highest moment.  Romola, who
shrank with unconquerable repulsion from the shrill volubility of those
illuminated women, and had just now a special repugnance towards Camilla
because of a report that she had announced revelations hostile to
Bernardo del Nero, was at first inclined to send back a flat refusal.
Camilla's message might refer to public affairs, and Romola's immediate
prompting was to close her ears against knowledge that might only make
her mental burden heavier.  But it had become so thoroughly her habit to
reject her impulsive choice, and to obey passively the guidance of
outward claims, that, reproving herself for allowing her presentiments
to make her cowardly and selfish, she ended by compliance, and went
straight to Camilla.

She found the nervous grey-haired woman in a chamber arranged as much as
possible like a convent cell.  The thin fingers clutching Romola as she
sat, and the eager voice addressing her at first in a loud whisper,
caused her a physical shrinking that made it difficult for her to keep
her seat.

Camilla had a vision to communicate--a vision in which it had been
revealed to her by Romola's Angel, that Romola knew certain secrets
concerning her godfather, Bernardo del Nero, which, if disclosed, might
save the Republic from peril.  Camilla's voice rose louder and higher as
she narrated her vision, and ended by exhorting Romola to obey the
command of her Angel, and separate herself from the enemy of God.

Romola's impetuosity was that of a massive nature, and, except in
moments when she was deeply stirred, her manner was calm and
self-controlled.  She had a constitutional disgust for the shallow
excitability of women like Camilla, whose faculties seemed all wrought
up into fantasies, leaving nothing for emotion and thought.  The
exhortation was not yet ended when she started up and attempted to
wrench her arm from Camilla's tightening grasp.  It was of no use.  The
prophetess kept her hold like a crab, and, only incited to more eager
exhortation by Romola's resistance, was carried beyond her own intention
into a shrill statement of other visions which were to corroborate this.
Christ himself had appeared to her and ordered her to send his commands
to certain citizens in office that they should throw Bernardo del Nero
from the window of the Palazzo Vecchio.  Fra Girolamo himself knew of
it, and had not dared this time to say that the vision was not of Divine
authority.

"And since then," said Camilla, in her excited treble, straining upward
with wild eyes towards Romola's face, "the Blessed Infant has come to me
and laid a wafer of sweetness on my tongue in token of his pleasure that
I had done his will."

"Let me go!" said Romola, in a deep voice of anger.  "God grant you are
mad! else you are detestably wicked!"

The violence of her effort to be free was too strong for Camilla now.
She wrenched away her arm and rushed out of the room, not pausing till
she had hurriedly gone far along the street, and found herself close to
the church of the Badia.  She had but to pass behind the curtain under
the old stone arch, and she would find a sanctuary shut in from the
noise and hurry of the street, where all objects and all uses suggested
the thought of an eternal peace subsisting in the midst of turmoil.

She turned in, and sinking down on the step of the altar in front of
Filippino Lippi's serene Virgin appearing to Saint Bernard, she waited
in hope that the inward tumult which agitated her would by-and-by
subside.

The thought which pressed on her the most acutely was that Camilla could
allege Savonarola's countenance of her wicked folly.  Romola did not for
a moment believe that he had sanctioned the throwing of Bernardo del
Nero from the window as a Divine suggestion; she felt certain that there
was falsehood or mistake in that allegation.  Savonarola had become more
and more severe in his views of resistance to malcontents; but the ideas
of strict law and order were fundamental to all his political teaching.
Still, since he knew the possibly fatal effects of visions like
Camilla's, since he had a marked distrust of such spirit-seeing women,
and kept aloof from them as much as possible, why, with his readiness to
denounce wrong from the pulpit, did he not publicly denounce these
pretended revelations which brought new darkness instead of light across
the conception of a Supreme Will?  Why?  The answer came with painful
clearness: he was fettered inwardly by the consciousness that such
revelations were not, in their basis, distinctly separable from his own
visions; he was fettered outwardly by the foreseen consequence of
raising a cry against himself even among members of his own party, as
one who would suppress all Divine inspiration of which he himself was
not the vehicle--he or his confidential and supplementary seer of
visions, Fra Salvestro.

Romola, kneeling with buried face on the altar-step, was enduring one of
those sickening moments, when the enthusiasm which had come to her as
the only energy strong enough to make life worthy, seemed to be
inevitably bound up with vain dreams and wilful eye-shutting.  Her mind
rushed back with a new attraction towards the strong worldly sense, the
dignified prudence, the untheoretic virtues of her godfather, who was to
be treated as a sort of Agag because he held that a more restricted form
of government was better than the Great Council, and because he would
not pretend to forget old ties to the banished family.

But with this last thought rose the presentiment of some plot to restore
the Medici; and then again she felt that the popular party was half
justified in its fierce suspicion.  Again she felt that to keep the
Government of Florence pure, and to keep out a vicious rule, was a
sacred cause; the Frate was right there, and had carried her
understanding irrevocably with him.  But at this moment the assent of
her understanding went alone; it was given unwillingly.  Her heart was
recoiling from a right allied to so much narrowness; a right apparently
entailing that hard systematic judgment of men which measures them by
assents and denials quite superficial to the manhood within them.  Her
affection and respect were clinging with new tenacity to her godfather,
and with him to those memories of her father which were in the same
opposition to the division of men into sheep and goats by the easy mark
of some political or religious symbol.

After all has been said that can be said about the widening influence of
ideas, it remains true that they would hardly be such strong agents
unless they were taken in a solvent of feeling.  The great
world-struggle of developing thought is continually foreshadowed in the
struggle of the affections, seeking a justification for love and hope.

If Romola's intellect had been less capable of discerning the
complexities in human things, all the early loving associations of her
life would have forbidden her to accept implicitly the denunciatory
exclusiveness of Savonarola.  She had simply felt that his mind had
suggested deeper and more efficacious truth to her than any other, and
the large breathing-room she found in his grand view of human duties had
made her patient towards that part of his teaching which she could not
absorb, so long as its practical effect came into collision with no
strong force in her.  But now a sudden insurrection of feeling had
brought about that collision.  Her indignation, once roused by Camilla's
visions, could not pause there, but ran like an illuminating fire over
all the kindred facts in Savonarola's teaching, and for the moment she
felt what was true in the scornful sarcasms she heard continually flung
against him, more keenly than she felt what was false.

But it was an illumination that made all life look ghastly to her.
Where were the beings to whom she could cling, with whom she could work
and endure, with the belief that she was working for the right?  On the
side from which moral energy came lay a fanaticism from which she was
shrinking with newly-startled repulsion; on the side to which she was
drawn by affection and memory, there was the presentiment of some secret
plotting, which her judgment told her would not be unfairly called
crime.  And still surmounting every other thought was the dread inspired
by Tito's hints, lest that presentiment should be converted into
knowledge, in such a way that she would be torn by irreconcilable
claims.

Calmness would not come even on the altar-steps; it would not come from
looking at the serene picture where the saint, writing in the rocky
solitude, was being visited by faces with celestial peace in them.
Romola was in the hard press of human difficulties, and that rocky
solitude was too far off.  She rose from her knees that she might hasten
to her sick people in the courtyard, and by some immediate beneficent
action, revive that sense of worth in life which at this moment was
unfed by any wider faith.  But when she turned round, she found herself
face to face with a man who was standing only two yards off her.  The
man was Baldassarre.



CHAPTER FIFTY THREE.

ON SAN MINIATO.

"I would speak with you," said Baldassarre, as Romola looked at him in
silent expectation.  It was plain that he had followed her, and had been
waiting for her.  She was going at last to know the secret about him.

"Yes," she said, with the same sort of submission that she might have
shown under an imposed penance.  "But you wish to go where no one can
hear us?"

"Where _he_ will not come upon us," said Baldassarre, turning and
glancing behind him timidly.  "Out--in the air--away from the streets."

"I sometimes go to San Miniato at this hour," said Romola.  "If you
like, I will go now, and you can follow me.  It is far, but we can be
solitary there."

He nodded assent, and Romola set out.  To some women it might have
seemed an alarming risk to go to a comparatively solitary spot with a
man who had some of the outward signs of that madness which Tito
attributed to him.  But Romola was not given to personal fears, and she
was glad of the distance that interposed some delay before another blow
fell on her.  The afternoon was far advanced, and the sun was already
low in the west, when she paused on some rough ground in the shadow of
the cypress-trunks, and looked round for Baldassarre.  He was not far
off, but when he reached her, he was glad to sink down on an edge of
stony earth.  His thickset frame had no longer the sturdy vigour which
belonged to it when he first appeared with the rope round him in the
Duomo; and under the transient tremor caused by the exertion of walking
up the hill, his eyes seemed to have a more helpless vagueness.

"The hill is steep," said Romola, with compassionate gentleness, seating
herself by him.  "And I fear you have been weakened by want?"

He turned his head and fixed his eyes on her in silence, unable, now the
moment of speech was come, to seize the words that would convey the
thought he wanted to utter: and she remained as motionless as she could,
lest he should suppose her impatient.  He looked like nothing higher
than a common-bred, neglected old man; but she was used now to be very
near to such people, and to think a great deal about their troubles.
Gradually his glance gathered a more definite expression, and at last he
said with abrupt emphasis--

"Ah! you would have been my daughter!"

The swift flush came in Romola's face and went back again as swiftly,
leaving her with white lips a little apart, like a marble image of
horror.  For her mind, the revelation was made.  She divined the facts
that lay behind that single word, and in the first moment there could be
no check to the impulsive belief which sprang from her keen experience
of Tito's nature.  The sensitive response of her face was a stimulus to
Baldassarre; for the first time his words had wrought their right
effect.  He went on with gathering eagerness and firmness, laying his
hand on her arm.

"You are a woman of proud blood--is it not true?  You go to hear the
preacher; you hate baseness--baseness that smiles and triumphs.  You
hate your husband?"

"Oh God! were you really his father?" said Romola, in a low voice, too
entirely possessed by the images of the past to take any note of
Baldassarre's question.  "Or was it as he said?  Did you take him when
he was little?"

"Ah, you believe me--you know what he is!" said Baldassarre, exultingly,
tightening the pressure on her arm, as if the contact gave him power.
"You will help me?"

"Yes," said Romola, not interpreting the words as he meant them.  She
laid her palm gently on the rough hand that grasped her arm, and the
tears came to her eyes as she looked at him.  "Oh, it is piteous!  Tell
me--you were a great scholar; you taught him.  How is it?"

She broke off Tito's allegation of this man's madness had come across
her; and where were the signs even of past refinement?  But she had the
self-command not to move her hand.  She sat perfectly still, waiting to
listen with new caution.

"It is gone!--it is all gone!" said Baldassarre; "and they would not
believe me, because he lied, and said I was mad; and they had me dragged
to prison.  And I am old--my mind will not come back.  And the world is
against me."

He paused a moment, and his eyes sank as if he were under a wave of
despondency.  Then he looked up at her again, and said with renewed
eagerness--"But _you_ are not against me.  He made you love him, and he
has been false to you; and you hate him.  Yes, he made _me_ love him: he
was beautiful and gentle, and I was a lonely man.  I took him when they
were beating him.  He slept in my bosom when he was little, and I
watched him as he grew, and gave him all my knowledge, and everything
that was mine I meant to be his.  I had many things; money, and books,
and gems.  He had my gems--he sold them; and he left me in slavery.  He
never came to seek me, and when I came back poor and in misery, he
denied me.  He said I was a madman."

"He told us his father was dead--was drowned," said Romola, faintly.
"Surely he must have believed it then.  Oh! he could not have been so
base _then_!"

A vision had risen of what Tito was to her in those first days when she
thought no more of wrong in him than a child thinks of poison in
flowers.  The yearning regret that lay in that memory brought some
relief from the tension of horror.  With one great sob the tears rushed
forth.

"Ah, you are young, and the tears come easily," said Baldassarre, with
some impatience.  "But tears are no good; they only put out the fire
within, and it is the fire that works.  Tears will hinder us.  Listen to
me."

Romola turned towards him with a slight start.  Again the possibility of
his madness had darted through her mind, and checked the rush of belief.
If, after all, this man were only a mad assassin?  But her deep belief
in this story still lay behind, and it was more in sympathy than in fear
that she avoided the risk of paining him by any show of doubt.

"Tell me," she said, as gently as she could, "how did you lose your
memory--your scholarship."

"I was ill.  I can't tell how long--it was a blank.  I remember nothing,
only at last I was sitting in the sun among the stones, and everything
else was darkness.  And slowly, and by degrees, I felt something besides
that: a longing for something--I did not know what--that never came.
And when I was in the ship on the waters I began to know what I longed
for; it was for the Boy to come back--it was to find all my thoughts
again, for I was locked away outside them all.  And I am outside now.  I
feel nothing but a wall and darkness."

Baldassarre had become dreamy again, and sank into silence, resting his
head between his hands; and again Romola's belief in him had submerged
all cautioning doubts.  The pity with which she dwelt on his words
seemed like the revival of an old pang.  Had she not daily seen how her
father missed Dino and the future he had dreamed of in that son?

"It all came back once," Baldassarre went on presently.  "I was master
of everything.  I saw all the world again, and my gems, and my books;
and I thought I had him in my power, and I went to expose him where--
where the lights were and the trees; and he lied again, and said I was
mad, and they dragged me away to prison...  Wickedness is strong; and he
wears armour."

The fierceness had flamed up again.  He spoke with his former intensity,
and again he grasped Romola's arm.

"But you will help me?  He has been false to you too.  He has another
wife, and she has children.  He makes her believe he is her husband, and
she is a foolish, helpless thing.  I will show you where she lives."

The first shock that passed through Romola was visibly one of anger.
The woman's sense of indignity was inevitably foremost.  Baldassarre
instinctively felt her in sympathy with him.

"You hate him," he went on.  "Is it not true?  There is no love between
you; I know that.  I know women can hate; and you have proud blood.  You
hate falseness, and you can love revenge."

Romola sat paralysed by the shock of conflicting feelings.  She was not
conscious of the grasp that was bruising her tender arm.

"You shall contrive it," said Baldassarre, presently, in an eager
whisper.  "I have learned by heart that you are his rightful wife.  You
are a noble woman.  You go to hear the preacher of vengeance; you will
help justice.  But you will think for me.  My mind goes--everything goes
sometimes--all but the fire.  The fire is God: it is justice: it will
not die.  You believe that--is it not true?  If they will not hang him
for robbing me, you will take away his armour--you will make him go
without it, and I will stab him.  I have a knife, and my arm is still
strong enough."

He put his hand under his tunic, and reached out the hidden knife,
feeling the edge abstractedly, as if he needed the sensation to keep
alive his ideas.

It seemed to Romola as if every fresh hour of her life were to become
more difficult than the last.  Her judgment was too vigorous and rapid
for her to fall into, the mistake of using futile deprecatory words to a
man in Baldassarre's state of mind.  She chose not to answer his last
speech.  She would win time for his excitement to allay itself by asking
something else that she cared to know.  She spoke rather tremulously--

"You say she is foolish and helpless--that other wife--and believes him
to be her real husband.  Perhaps he is: perhaps he married her before he
married me."

"I cannot tell," said Baldassarre, pausing in that action of feeling the
knife, and looking bewildered.  "I can remember no more.  I only know
where she lives.  You shall see her.  I will take you; but not now," he
added hurriedly, "_he_ may be there.  The night is coming on."

"It is true," said Romola, starting up with a sudden consciousness that
the sun had set and the hills were darkening; "but you will come and
take me--when?"

"In the morning," said Baldassarre, dreaming that she, too, wanted to
hurry to her vengeance.

"Come to me, then, where you came to me to-day, in the church.  I will
be there at ten; and if you are not there, I will go again towards
mid-day.  Can you remember?"

"Mid-day," said Baldassarre--"only mid-day.  The same place, and
mid-day.  And, after that," he added, rising and grasping her arm again
with his left hand, while he held the knife in his right; "we will have
our revenge.  He shall feel the sharp edge of justice.  The world is
against me, but you will help me."

"I would help you in other ways," said Romola, making a first, timid
effort to dispel his illusion about her.  "I fear you are in want; you
have to labour, and get little.  I should like to bring you comforts,
and make you feel again that there is some one who cares for you."

"Talk no more about that," said Baldassarre, fiercely.  "I will have
nothing else.  Help me to wring one drop of vengeance on this side of
the grave.  I have nothing but my knife.  It is sharp; but there is a
moment after the thrust when men see the face of death,--and it shall be
my face that he will see."

He loosed his hold, and sank down again in a sitting posture.  Romola
felt helpless: she must defer all intentions till the morrow.

"Mid-day, then," she said, in a distinct voice.

"Yes," he answered, with an air of exhaustion.  "Go; I will rest here."

She hastened away.  Turning at the last spot whence he was likely to be
in sight, she saw him seated still.



CHAPTER FIFTY FOUR.

THE EVENING AND THE MORNING.

Romola had a purpose in her mind as she was hastening away; a purpose
which had been growing through the afternoon hours like a side-stream,
rising higher and higher along with the main current.  It was less a
resolve than a necessity of her feeling.  Heedless of the darkening
streets, and not caring to call for Maso's slow escort, she hurried
across the bridge where the river showed itself black before the distant
dying red, and took the most direct way to the Old Palace.  She might
encounter her husband there.  No matter.  She could not weigh
probabilities; she must discharge her heart.  She did not know what she
passed in the pillared court or up the wide stairs; she only knew that
she asked an usher for the Gonfaloniere, giving her name, and begging to
be shown into a private room.

She was not left long alone with the frescoed figures and the newly-lit
tapers.  Soon the door opened, and Bernardo del Nero entered, still
carrying his white head erect above his silk lucco.

"Romola, my child, what is this?" he said, in a tone of anxious surprise
as he closed the door.

She had uncovered her head and went towards him without speaking.  He
laid his hand on her shoulder, and held her a little way from him that
he might see her better.  Her face was haggard from fatigue and long
agitation, her hair had rolled down in disorder; but there was an
excitement in her eyes that seemed to have triumphed over the bodily
consciousness.

"What has he done?" said Bernardo, abruptly.  "Tell me everything,
child; throw away pride.  I am your father."

"It is not about myself--nothing about myself," said Romola, hastily.
"Dearest godfather, it is about you.  I have heard things--some I cannot
tell you.  But you are in danger in the palace; you are in danger
everywhere.  There are fanatical men who would harm you, and--and there
are traitors.  Trust nobody.  If you trust, you will be betrayed."

Bernardo smiled.

"Have you worked yourself up into this agitation, my poor child," he
said, raising his hand to her head and patting it gently, "to tell such
old truth as that to an old man like me?"

"Oh no, no! they are not old truths that I mean," said Romola, pressing
her clasped hands painfully together, as if that action would help her
to suppress what must not be told.  "They are fresh things that I know,
but cannot tell.  Dearest godfather, you know I am not foolish.  I would
not come to you without reason.  Is it too late to warn you against any
one, _every_ one who seems to be working on your side?  Is it too late
to say, `Go to your villa and keep away in the country when these three
more days of office are over?'  Oh God! perhaps it is too late! and if
any harm comes to you, it will be as if I had done it!"

The last words had burst from Romola involuntarily: a long-stifled
feeling had found spasmodic utterance.  But she herself was startled and
arrested.

"I mean," she added, hesitatingly, "I know nothing positive.  I only
know what fills me with fears."

"Poor child!" said Bernardo, looking at her with quiet penetration for a
moment or two.  Then he said: "Go, Romola--go home and rest.  These
fears may be only big ugly shadows of something very little and
harmless.  Even traitors must see their interest in betraying; the rats
will run where they smell the cheese, and there is no knowing yet which
way the scent will come."

He paused, and turned away his eyes from her with an air of abstraction,
till, with a slow shrug, he added--

"As for warnings, they are of no use to me, child.  I enter into no
plots, but I never forsake my colours.  If I march abreast with
obstinate men, who will rush on guns and pikes, I must share the
consequences.  Let us say no more about that.  I have not many years
left at the bottom of my sack for them to rob me of.  Go, child; go home
and rest."

He put his hand on her head again caressingly, and she could not help
clinging to his arm, and pressing her brow against his shoulder.  Her
godfather's caress seemed the last thing that was left to her out of
that young filial life, which now looked so happy to her even in its
troubles, for they were troubles untainted by anything hateful.

"Is silence best, my Romola?" said the old man.

"Yes, now; but I cannot tell whether it always will be," she answered,
hesitatingly, raising her head with an appealing look.

"Well, you have a father's ear while I am above ground,"--he lifted the
black drapery and folded it round her head, adding--"and a father's
home; remember that," Then opening the door, he said: "There, hasten
away.  You are like a black ghost; you will be safe enough."

When Romola fell asleep that night, she slept deep.  Agitation had
reached its limits; she must gather strength before she could suffer
more; and, in spite of rigid habit, she slept on far beyond sunrise.

When she awoke, it was to the sound of guns.  Piero de' Medici, with
thirteen hundred men at his back, was before the gate that looks towards
Rome.

So much Romola learned from Maso, with many circumstantial additions of
dubious quality.  A countryman had come in and alarmed the Signoria
before it was light, else the city would have been taken by surprise.
His master was not in the house, having been summoned to the Palazzo
long ago.  She sent out the old man again, that he might gather news,
while she went up to the loggia from time to time to try and discern any
signs of the dreaded entrance having been made, or of its having been
effectively repelled.  Maso brought her word that the great Piazza was
full of armed men, and that many of the chief citizens suspected as
friends of the Medici had been summoned to the palace and detained
there.  Some of the people seemed not to mind whether Piero got in or
not, and some said the Signoria itself had invited him; but however that
might be, they were giving him an ugly welcome; and the soldiers from
Pisa were coming against him.

In her memory of those morning hours, there were not many things that
Romola could distinguish as actual external experiences standing
markedly out above the tumultuous waves of retrospect and anticipation.
She knew that she had really walked to the Badia by the appointed time
in spite of street alarms; she knew that she had waited there in vain.
And the scene she had witnessed when she came out of the church, and
stood watching on the steps while the doors were being closed behind her
for the afternoon interval, always came back to her like a remembered
waking.

There was a change in the faces and tones of the people, armed and
unarmed, who were pausing or hurrying along the streets.  The guns were
firing again, but the sound only provoked laughter.  She soon knew the
cause of the change.  Piero de' Medici and his horsemen had turned their
backs on Florence, and were galloping as fast as they could along the
Siena road.  She learned this from a substantial shop-keeping Piagnone,
who had not yet laid down his pike.

"It is true," he ended, with a certain bitterness in his emphasis.
"Piero is gone, but there are those left behind who were in the secret
of his coming--we all know that; and if the new Signoria does its duty
we shall soon know who they are."

The words darted through Romola like a sharp spasm; but the evil they
foreshadowed was not yet close upon her, and as she entered her home
again, her most pressing anxiety was the possibility that she had lost
sight for a long while of Baldassarre.



CHAPTER FIFTY FIVE.

WAITING.

The lengthening sunny days went on without bringing either what Romola
most desired or what she most dreaded.  They brought no sign from
Baldassarre, and, in spite of special watch on the part of the
Government, no revelation of the suspected conspiracy.  But they brought
other things which touched her closely, and bridged the phantom-crowded
space of anxiety with active sympathy in immediate trial.  They brought
the spreading Plague and the Excommunication of Savonarola.

Both these events tended to arrest her incipient alienation from the
Frate, and to rivet again her attachment to the man who had opened to
her the new life of duty, and who seemed now to be worsted in the fight
for principle against profligacy.  For Romola could not carry from day
to day into the abodes of pestilence and misery the sublime excitement
of a gladness that, since such anguish existed, she too existed to make
some of the anguish less bitter, without remembering that she owed this
transcendent moral life to Fra Girolamo.  She could not witness the
silencing and excommunication of a man whose distinction from the great
mass of the clergy lay, not in any heretical belief, not in his
superstitions, but in the energy with which he sought to make the
Christian life a reality, without feeling herself drawn strongly to his
side.

Far on in the hot days of June the Excommunication, for some weeks
arrived from Rome, was solemnly published in the Duomo.  Romola went to
witness the scene, that the resistance it inspired might invigorate that
sympathy with Savonarola which was one source of her strength.  It was
in memorable contrast with the scene she had been accustomed to witness
there.

Instead of upturned citizen-faces filling the vast area under the
morning light, the youngest rising amphitheatre-wise towards the walls,
and making a garland of hope around the memories of age--instead of the
mighty voice thrilling all hearts with the sense of great things,
visible and invisible, to be struggled for--there were the bare walls at
evening made more sombre by the glimmer of tapers; there was the black
and grey flock of monks and secular clergy with bent, unexpectant faces;
there was the occasional tinkling of little bells in the pauses of a
monotonous voice reading a sentence which had already been long hanging
up in the churches; and at last there was the extinction of the tapers,
and the slow, shuffling tread of monkish feet departing in the dim
silence.

Romola's ardour on the side of the Frate was doubly strengthened by the
gleeful triumph she saw in hard and coarse faces, and by the
fear-stricken confusion in the faces and speech of many among his
strongly-attached friends.  The question where the duty of obedience
ends, and the duty of resistance begins, could in no case be an easy
one; but it was made overwhelmingly difficult by the belief that the
Church was--not a compromise of parties to secure a more or less
approximate justice in the appropriation of funds, but--a living
organism, instinct with Divine power to bless and to curse.  To most of
the pious Florentines, who had hitherto felt no doubt in their adherence
to the Frate, that belief in the Divine potency of the Church was not an
embraced opinion, it was an inalienable impression, like the concavity
of the blue firmament; and the boldness of Savonarola's written
arguments that the Excommunication was unjust, and that, being unjust,
it was not valid, only made them tremble the more, as a defiance cast at
a mystic image, against whose subtle immeasurable power there was
neither weapon nor defence.

But Romola, whose mind had not been allowed to draw its early
nourishment from the traditional associations of the Christian community
in which her father had lived a life apart, felt her relation to the
Church only through Savonarola; his moral force had been the only
authority to which she had bowed; and in his excommunication she only
saw the menace of hostile vice: on one side she saw a man whose life was
devoted to the ends of public virtue and spiritual purity, and on the
other the assault of alarmed selfishness, headed by a lustful, greedy,
lying, and murderous old man, once called Rodrigo Borgia, and now lifted
to the pinnacle of infamy as Pope Alexander the Sixth.  The finer shades
of fact which soften the edge of such antitheses are not apt to be seen
except by neutrals, who are not distressed to discern some folly in
martyrs and some judiciousness in the men who burnt them.  But Romola
required a strength that neutrality could not give; and this
Excommunication, which simplified and ennobled the resistant position of
Savonarola by bringing into prominence its wider relations, seemed to
come to her like a rescue from the threatening isolation of criticism
and doubt.  The Frate was now withdrawn from that smaller antagonism
against Florentine enemies into which he continually fell in the
unchecked excitement of the pulpit, and presented himself simply as
appealing to the Christian world against a vicious exercise of
ecclesiastical power.  He was a standard-bearer leaping into the breach.
Life never seems so clear and easy as when the heart is beating faster
at the sight of some generous self-risking deed.  We feel no doubt then
what is the highest prize the soul can win; we almost believe in our own
power to attain it.  By a new current of such enthusiasm Romola was
helped through these difficult summer days.  She had ventured on no
words to Tito that would apprise him of her late interview with
Baldassarre, and the revelation he had made to her.  What would such
agitating, difficult words win from him?  No admission of the truth;
nothing, probably, but a cool sarcasm about her sympathy with his
assassin.  Baldassarre was evidently helpless: the thing to be feared
was, not that he should injure Tito, but that Tito, coming upon his
traces, should carry out some new scheme for ridding himself of the
injured man who was a haunting dread to him.  Romola felt that she could
do nothing decisive until she had seen Baldassarre again, and learned
the full truth about that "other wife"--learned whether she were the
wife to whom Tito was first bound.

The possibilities about that other wife, which involved the worst wound
to her hereditary pride, mingled themselves as a newly-embittering
suspicion with the earliest memories of her illusory love, eating away
the lingering associations of tenderness with the past image of her
husband; and her irresistible belief in the rest of Baldassarre's
revelation made her shrink from Tito with a horror which would perhaps
have urged some passionate speech in spite of herself if he had not been
more than usually absent from home.  Like many of the wealthier citizens
in that time of pestilence, he spent the intervals of business chiefly
in the country: the agreeable Melema was welcome at many villas, and
since Romola had refused to leave the city, he had no need to provide a
country residence of his own.

But at last, in the later days of July, the alleviation of those public
troubles which had absorbed her activity and much of her thought, left
Romola to a less counteracted sense of her personal lot.  The Plague had
almost disappeared, and the position of Savonarola was made more hopeful
by a favourable magistracy, who were writing urgent vindicatory letters
to Rome on his behalf, entreating the withdrawal of the Excommunication.

Romola's healthy and vigorous frame was undergoing the reaction of
languor inevitable after continuous excitement and over-exertion; but
her mental restlessness would not allow her to remain at home without
peremptory occupation, except during the sultry hours.  In the cool of
the morning and evening she walked out constantly, varying her direction
as much as possible, with the vague hope that if Baldassarre were still
alive she might encounter him.  Perhaps some illness had brought a new
paralysis of memory, and he had forgotten where she lived--forgotten
even her existence.  That was her most sanguine explanation of his
non-appearance.  The explanation she felt to be most probable was, that
he had died of the Plague.



CHAPTER FIFTY SIX.

THE OTHER WIFE.

The morning warmth was already beginning to be rather oppressive to
Romola, when, after a walk along by the walls on her way from San Marco,
she turned towards the intersecting streets again at the gate of Santa
Croce.

The Borgo La Croce was so still, that she listened to her own footsteps
on the pavement in the sunny silence, until, on approaching a bend in
the street, she saw, a few yards before her, a little child not more
than three years old, with no other clothing than his white shirt, pause
from a waddling run and look around him.  In the first moment of coming
nearer she could only see his back--a boy's back, square and sturdy,
with a cloud of reddish-brown curls above it; but in the next he turned
towards her, and she could see his dark eyes wide with tears, and his
lower lip pushed up and trembling, while his fat brown fists clutched
his shirt helplessly.  The glimpse of a tall black figure sending a
shadow over him brought his bewildered fear to a climax, and a loud
crying sob sent the big tears rolling.

Romola, with the ready maternal instinct which was one hidden source of
her passionate tenderness, instantly uncovered her head, and, stooping
down on the pavement, put her arms round him, and her cheeks against
his, while she spoke to him in caressing tones.  At first his sobs were
only the louder, but he made no effort to get away, and presently the
outburst ceased with that strange abruptness which belongs to childish
joys and griefs: his face lost its distortion, and was fixed in an
open-mouthed gaze at Romola.

"You have lost yourself, little one," she said, kissing him.  "Never
mind! we will find the house again.  Perhaps mamma will meet us."

She divined that he had made his escape at a moment when the mother's
eyes were turned away from him, and thought it likely that he would soon
be followed.

"Oh, what a heavy, heavy boy!" she said, trying to lift him.  "I cannot
carry you.  Come, then, you must toddle back by my side."

The parted lips remained motionless in awed silence, and one brown fist
still clutched the shirt with as much tenacity as ever; but the other
yielded itself quite willingly to the wonderful white hand, strong but
soft.

"You _have_ a mamma?" said Romola, as they set out, looking down at the
boy with a certain yearning.  But he was mute.  A girl under those
circumstances might perhaps have chirped abundantly; not so this
square-shouldered little man with the big cloud of curls.

He was awake to the first sign of his whereabout, however.  At the
turning by the front of San Ambrogio he dragged Romola towards it,
looking up at her.

"Ah, that is the way home, is it?" she said, smiling at him.  He only
thrust his head forward and pulled, as an admonition that they should go
faster.

There was still another turning that he had a decided opinion about, and
then Romola found herself in a short street leading to open garden
ground.  It was in front of a house at the end of this street that the
little fellow paused, pulling her towards some stone stairs.  He had
evidently no wish for her to loose his hand, and she would not have been
willing to leave him without being sure that she was delivering him to
his friends.  They mounted the stairs, seeing but dimly in that sudden
withdrawal from the sunlight, till, at the final landing-place, an extra
stream of light came from an open doorway.  Passing through a small
lobby, they came to another open door, and there Romola paused.  Her
approach had not been heard.

On a low chair at the farther end of the room, opposite the light, sat
Tessa, with one hand on the edge of the cradle, and her head hanging a
little on one side, fast asleep.  Near one of the windows, with her back
turned towards the door, sat Monna Lisa at her work of preparing salad,
in deaf unconsciousness.  There was only an instant for Romola's eyes to
take in that still scene; for Lillo snatched his hand away from her and
ran up to his mother's side, not making any direct effort to wake her,
but only leaning his head back against her arm, and surveying Romola
seriously from that distance.

As Lillo pushed against her, Tessa opened her eyes, and looked up in
bewilderment; but her glance had no sooner rested on the figure at the
opposite doorway than she started up, blushed deeply, and began to
tremble a little, neither speaking nor moving forward.

"Ah! we have seen each other before," said Romola, smiling, and coming
forward.  "I am glad it was _your_ little boy.  He was crying in the
street; I suppose he had run away.  So we walked together a little way,
and then he knew where he was, and brought me here.  But you had not
missed him?  That is well, else you would have been frightened."

The shock of finding that Lillo had run away overcame every other
feeling in Tessa for the moment.  Her colour went again, and, seizing
Lillo's arm, she ran with him to Monna Lisa, saying, with a half sob,
loud in the old woman's ear--

"Oh, Lisa, you are wicked!  Why will you stand with your back to the
door?  Lillo ran away ever so far into the street."

"Holy Mother!" said Monna Lisa, in her meek, thick tone, letting the
spoon fall from her hands.  "Where were _you_, then?  I thought you were
there, and had your eye on him."

"But you _know_ I go to sleep when I am rocking," said Tessa, in pettish
remonstrance.

"Well, well, we must keep the outer door shut, or else tie him up," said
Monna Lisa, "for he'll be as cunning as Satan before long, and that's
the holy truth.  But how came he back, then?"

This question recalled Tessa to the consciousness of Romola's presence.
Without answering, she turned towards her, blushing and timid again, and
Monna Lisa's eyes followed her movement.  The old woman made a low
reverence, and said--

"Doubtless the most noble lady brought him back."  Then, advancing a
little nearer to Romola, she added, "It's my shame for him to have been
found with only his shirt on; but he kicked, and wouldn't have his other
clothes on this morning, and the mother, poor thing, will never hear of
his being beaten.  But what's an old woman to do without a stick when
the lad's legs get so strong?  Let your nobleness look at his legs."

Lillo, conscious that his legs were in question, pulled his shirt up a
little higher, and looked down at their olive roundness with a
dispassionate and curious air.  Romola laughed, and stooped to give him
a caressing shake and a kiss, and this action helped the reassurance
that Tessa had already gathered from Monna Lisa's address to Romola.
For when Naldo had been told about the adventure at the Carnival, and
Tessa had asked him who the heavenly lady that had come just when she
was wanted, and had vanished so soon, was likely to be--whether she
could be the Holy Madonna herself?--he had answered, "Not exactly, my
Tessa; only one of the saints," and had not chosen to say more.  So that
in the dreamlike combination of small experience which made up Tessa's
thought, Romola had remained confusedly associated with the pictures in
the churches, and when she reappeared, the grateful remembrance of her
protection was slightly tinctured with religious awe--not deeply, for
Tessa's dread was chiefly of ugly and evil beings.  It seemed unlikely
that good beings would be angry and punish her, as it was the nature of
Nofri and the devil to do.  And now that Monna Lisa had spoken freely
about Lillo's legs and Romola had laughed, Tessa was more at her ease.

"Ninna's in the cradle," she said.  "_She's_ pretty too."

Romola went to look at the sleeping Ninna, and Monna Lisa, one of the
exceptionally meek deaf, who never expect to be spoken to, returned to
her salad.

"Ah! she is waking: she has opened her blue eyes," said Romola.  "You
must take her up, and I will sit down in this chair--may I?--and nurse
Lillo.  Come, Lillo!"

She sat down in Tito's chair, and put out her arms towards the lad,
whose eyes had followed her.  He hesitated: and, pointing his small
fingers at her with a half-puzzled, half-angry feeling, said, "That's
Babbo's chair," not seeing his way out of the difficulty if Babbo came
and found Romola in his place.

"But Babbo is not here, and I shall go soon.  Come, let me nurse you as
he does," said Romola, wondering to herself for the first time what sort
of Babbo he was whose wife was dressed in contadina fashion, but had a
certain daintiness about her person that indicated idleness and plenty.
Lillo consented to be lifted up, and, finding the lap exceedingly
comfortable, began to explore her dress and hands, to see if there were
any ornaments beside the rosary.

Tessa, who had hitherto been occupied in coaxing Ninna out of her waking
peevishness, now sat down in her low chair, near Romola's knee,
arranging Ninna's tiny person to advantage, jealous that the strange
lady too seemed to notice the boy most, as Naldo did.

"Lillo was going to be angry with me, because I sat in Babbo's chair,"
said Romola, as she bent forward to kiss Ninna's little foot.  "Will he
come soon and want it?"

"Ah, no!" said Tessa, "you can sit in it a long while.  I shall be sorry
when you go.  When you first came to take care of me at the Carnival, I
thought it was wonderful; you came and went away again so fast.  And
Naldo said, perhaps you were a saint, and that made me tremble a little,
though the saints are very good, I know; and you were good to me, and
now you have taken care of Lillo.  Perhaps you will always come and take
care of me.  That was how Naldo did a long while ago; he came and took
care of me when I was frightened, one San Giovanni.  I couldn't think
where he came from--he was so beautiful and good.  And so are you,"
ended Tessa, looking up at Romola with devout admiration.

"Naldo is your husband.  His eyes are like Lillo's," said Romola,
looking at the boy's darkly-pencilled eyebrows, unusual at his age.  She
did not speak interrogatively, but with a quiet certainty of inference
which was necessarily mysterious to Tessa.

"Ah! you know him!" she said, pausing a little in wonder.  "Perhaps you
know Nofri and Peretola, and our house on the hill, and everything.
Yes, like Lillo's; but not his hair.  His hair is dark and long--" she
went on, getting rather excited.  "Ah! if you know it, ecco!"

She had put her hand to a thin red silk cord that hung round her neck,
and drew from her bosom the tiny old parchment _Breve_, the horn of red
coral, and a long dark curl carefully tied at one end and suspended with
those mystic treasures.  She held them towards Romola, away from Ninna's
snatching hand.

"It is a fresh one.  I cut it lately.  See how bright it is!" she said,
laying it against the white background of Romola's fingers.  "They get
dim, and then he lets me cut another when his hair is grown; and I put
it with the Breve, because sometimes he is away a long while, and then I
think it helps to take care of me."

A slight shiver passed through Romola as the curl was laid across her
fingers.  At Tessa's first mention of her husband as having come
mysteriously she knew not whence, a possibility had risen before Romola
that made her heart beat faster; for to one who is anxiously in search
of a certain object the faintest suggestions have a peculiar
significance.  And when the curl was held towards her, it seemed for an
instant like a mocking phantasm of the lock she herself had cut to wind
with one of her own five years ago.  But she preserved her outward
calmness, bent not only on knowing the truth, but also on coming to that
knowledge in a way that would not pain this poor, trusting, ignorant
thing, with the child's mind in the woman's body.  "Foolish and
helpless:" yes; so far she corresponded to Baldassarre's account.

"It is a beautiful curl," she said, resisting the impulse to withdraw
her hand.  "Lillo's curls will be like it, perhaps, for _his_ cheek,
too, is dark.  And you never know where your husband goes to when he
leaves you?"

"No," said Tessa, putting back her treasures out of the children's way.
"But I know Messer San Michele takes care of him, for he gave him a
beautiful coat, all made of little chains; and if he puts that on,
nobody can kill him.  And perhaps, if--"

Tessa hesitated a little, under a recurrence of that original dreamy
wonder about Romola which had been expelled by chatting contact--"if you
_were_ a saint, you would take care of him, too, because you have taken
care of me and Lillo."

An agitated flush came over Romola's face in the first moment of
certainty, but she had bent her cheek against Lillo's head.  The feeling
that leaped out in that flush was something like exultation at the
thought that the wife's burden might be about to slip from her overladen
shoulders; that this little ignorant creature might prove to be Tito's
lawful wife.  A strange exultation for a proud and high-born woman to
have been brought to!  But it seemed to Romola as if that were the only
issue that would make duty anything else for her than an insoluble
problem.  Yet she was not deaf to Tessa's last appealing words; she
raised her head, and said, in her clearest tones--

"I will always take care of you if I see you need me.  But that
beautiful coat? your husband did not wear it when you were first
married?  Perhaps he used not to be so long away from you then?"

"Ah, yes! he was.  Much--much longer.  So long, I thought he would never
come back.  I used to cry.  Oh me!  I was beaten then; a long, long
while ago at Peretola, where we had the goats and mules."

"And how long had you been married before your husband had that
chain-coat?" said Romola, her heart beating faster and faster.

Tessa looked meditative, and began to count on her fingers, and Romola
watched the fingers as if they would tell the secret of her destiny.

"The chestnuts were ripe when we were married," said Tessa, marking off
her thumb and fingers again as she spoke; "and then again they were ripe
at Peretola before he came back, and then again, after that, on the
hill.  And soon the soldiers came, and we heard the trumpets, and then
Naldo had the coat."

"You had been married more than two years.  In which church were you
married?" said Romola, too entirely absorbed by one thought to put any
question that was less direct.  Perhaps before the next, morning she
might go to her godfather and say that she was not Tito Melema's lawful
wife--that the vows which had bound her to strive after an impossible
union had been made void beforehand.

Tessa gave a slight start at Romola's new tone of inquiry, and looked up
at her with a hesitating expression.  Hitherto she had prattled on
without consciousness that she was making revelations, any more than
when she said old things over and over again to Monna Lisa.

"Naldo said I was never to tell about that," she said, doubtfully.  "Do
you think he would not be angry if I told you?"

"It is right that you should tell me.  Tell me everything," said Romola,
looking at her with mild authority.

If the impression from Naldo's command had been much more recent than it
was, the constraining effect of Romola's mysterious authority would have
overcome it.  But the sense that she was telling what she had never told
before made her begin with a lowered voice.

"It was not in a church--it was at the Nativita, when there was a fair,
and all the people went overnight to see the Madonna in the Nunziata,
and my mother was ill and couldn't go, and I took the bunch of cocoons
for her; and then he came to me in the church and I heard him say,
`Tessa!'  I knew him because he had taken care of me at the San
Giovanni, and then we went into the piazza where the fair was, and I had
some _berlingozzi_, for I was hungry and he was very good to me; and at
the end of the piazza there was a holy father, and an altar like what
they have at the processions outside the churches.  So he married us,
and then Naldo took me back into the church and left me; and I went
home, and my mother died, and Nofri began to beat me more, and Naldo
never came back.  And I used to cry, and once at the Carnival I saw him
and followed him, and he was angry, and said he would come some time, I
must wait.  So I went and waited; but, oh! it was a long while before he
came; but he would have come if he could, for he was good; and then he
took me away, because I cried and said I could not bear to stay with
Nofri.  And, oh!  I was so glad, and since then I have been always
happy, for I don't mind about the goats and mules, because I have Lillo
and Ninna now; and Naldo is never angry, only I think he doesn't love
Ninna so well as Lillo, and she _is_ pretty."

Quite forgetting that she had thought her speech rather momentous at the
beginning, Tessa fell to devouring Ninna with kisses, while Romola sat
in silence with absent eyes.  It was inevitable that in this moment she
should think of the three beings before her chiefly in their relation to
her own lot, and she was feeling the chill of disappointment that her
difficulties were not to be solved by external law.  She had relaxed her
hold of Lillo, and was leaning her cheek against her hand, seeing
nothing of the scene around her.  Lillo was quick in perceiving a change
that was not agreeable to him; he had not yet made any return to her
caresses, but he objected to their withdrawal, and putting up both his
brown arms to pull her head towards him, he said, "Play with me again!"

Romola, roused from her self-absorption, clasped the lad anew, and
looked from him to Tessa, who had now paused from her shower of kisses,
and seemed to have returned to the more placid delight of contemplating
the heavenly lady's face.  That face was undergoing a subtle change,
like the gradual oncoming of a warmer, softer light.  Presently Romola
took her scissors from her scarsella, and cut off one of her long wavy
locks, while the three pair of wide eyes followed her movements with
kitten-like observation.

"I must go away from you now," she said, "but I will leave this lock of
hair that it may remind you of me, because if you are ever in trouble
you can think that perhaps God will send me to take care of you again.
I cannot tell you where to find me, but if I ever know that you want me,
I will come to you.  Addio!"

She had set down Lillo hurriedly, and held out her hand to Tessa, who
kissed it with a mixture of awe and sorrow at this parting.  Romola's
mind was oppressed with thoughts; she needed to be alone as soon as
possible, but with her habitual care for the least fortunate, she turned
aside to put her hand in a friendly way on Monna Lisa's shoulder and
make her a farewell sign.  Before the old woman had finished her deep
reverence, Romola had disappeared.

Monna Lisa and Tessa moved towards each other by simultaneous impulses,
while the two children stood clinging to their mother's skirts as if
they, too, felt the atmosphere of awe.

"Do you think she _was_ a saint?" said Tessa, in Lisa's ear, showing her
the lock.

Lisa rejected that notion very decidedly by a backward movement of her
fingers, and then stroking the rippled gold, said--

"She's a great and noble lady.  I saw such in my youth."

Romola went home and sat alone through the sultry hours of that day with
the heavy certainty that her lot was unchanged.  She was thrown back
again on the conflict between the demands of an outward law, which she
recognised as a widely-ramifying obligation, and the demands of inner
moral facts which were becoming more and more peremptory.  She had drunk
in deeply the spirit of that teaching by which Savonarola had urged her
to return to her place.  She felt that the sanctity attached to all
close relations, and, therefore, pre-eminently to the closest, was but
the expression in outward law of that result towards which all human
goodness and nobleness must spontaneously tend; that the light
abandonment of ties, whether inherited or voluntary, because they had
ceased to be pleasant, was the uprooting of social and personal virtue.
What else had Tito's crime towards Baldassarre been but that abandonment
working itself out to the most hideous extreme of falsity and
ingratitude?

And the inspiring consciousness breathed into her by Savonarola's
influence that her lot was vitally united with the general lot had
exalted even the minor details of obligation into religion.  She was
marching with a great army; she was feeling the stress of a common life.
If victims were needed, and it was uncertain on whom the lot might
fall, she would stand ready to answer to her name.  She had stood long;
she had striven hard to fulfil the bond, but she had seen all the
conditions which made the fulfilment possible gradually forsaking her.
The one effect of her marriage-tie seemed to be the stifling
predominance over her of a nature that she despised.  All her efforts at
union had only made its impossibility more palpable, and the relation
had become for her simply a degrading servitude.  The law was sacred.
Yes, but rebellion might be sacred too.  It flashed upon her mind that
the problem before her was essentially the same as that which had lain
before Savonarola--the problem where the sacredness of obedience ended,
and where the sacredness of rebellion began.  To her, as to him, there
had come one of those moments in life when the soul must dare to act on
its own warrant, not only without external law to appeal to, but in the
face of a law which is not unarmed with Divine lightnings--lightnings
that may yet fall if the warrant has been false.

Before the sun had gone down she had adopted a resolve.  She would ask
no counsel of her godfather or of Savonarola until she had made one
determined effort to speak freely with Tito and obtain his consent that
she should live apart from him.  She desired not to leave him
clandestinely again, or to forsake Florence.  She would tell him that if
he ever felt a real need of her, she would come back to him.  Was not
that the utmost faithfulness to her bond that could be required of her?
A shuddering anticipation came over her that he would clothe a refusal
in a sneering suggestion that she should enter a convent as the only
mode of quitting him that would not be scandalous.  He knew well that
her mind revolted from that means of escape, not only because of her own
repugnance to a narrow rule, but because all the cherished memories of
her father forbade that she should adopt a mode of life which was
associated with his deepest griefs and his bitterest dislike.

Tito had announced his intention of coming home this evening.  She would
wait for him, and say what she had to say at once, for it was difficult
to get his ear during the day.  If he had the slightest suspicion that
personal words were coming, he slipped away with an appearance of
unpremeditated ease.  When she sent for Maso to tell him that she would
wait for his master, she observed that the old man looked at her and
lingered with a mixture of hesitation and wondering anxiety; but finding
that she asked him no question, he slowly turned away.  Why should she
ask questions?  Perhaps Maso only knew or guessed something of what she
knew already.

It was late before Tito came.  Romola had been pacing up and down the
long room which had once been the library, with the windows open, and a
loose white linen robe on instead of her usual black garment.  She was
glad of that change after the long hours of heat and motionless
meditation; but the coolness and exercise made her more intensely
wakeful, and as she went with the lamp in her hand to open the door for
Tito, he might well have been startled by the vividness of her eyes and
the expression of painful resolution, which was in contrast with her
usual self-restrained quiescence before him.  But it seemed that this
excitement was just what he expected.

"Ah! it is you, Romola.  Maso is gone to bed," he said, in a grave,
quiet tone, interposing to close the door for her.  Then, turning round,
he said, looking at her more fully than he was wont, "You have heard it
all, I see."

Romola quivered.  _He_ then was inclined to take the initiative.  He had
been to Tessa.  She led the way through the nearest door, set down her
lamp, and turned towards him again.

"You must not think despairingly of the consequences," said Tito, in a
tone of soothing encouragement, at which Romola stood wondering, until
he added, "The accused have too many family ties with all parties not to
escape; and Messer Bernardo del Nero has other things in his favour
besides his age."

Romola started, and gave a cry as if she had been suddenly stricken by a
sharp weapon.

"What! you did not know it?" said Tito, putting his hand under her arm
that he might lead her to a seat; but she seemed to be unaware of his
touch.

"Tell me," she said, hastily--"tell me what it is."

"A man, whose name you may forget--Lamberto dell' Antella--who was
banished, has been seized within the territory: a letter has been found
on him of very dangerous import to the chief Mediceans, and the
scoundrel, who was once a favourite hound of Piero de' Medici, is ready
now to swear what any one pleases against him or his friends.  Some have
made their escape, but five are now in prison."

"My godfather?" said Romola, scarcely above a whisper, as Tito made a
slight pause.

"Yes: I grieve to say it.  But along with him there are three, at least,
whose names have a commanding interest even among the popular party--
Niccolo Ridolfi, Lorenzo Tornabuoni, and Giannozzo Pucci."

The tide of Romola's feelings had been violently turned into a new
channel.  In the tumult of that moment there could be no check to the
words which came as the impulsive utterance of her long-accumulating
horror.  When Tito had named the men of whom she felt certain he was the
confederate, she said, with a recoiling gesture and low-toned
bitterness--

"And _you_--you are safe?"

"You are certainly an amiable wife, my Romola," said Tito, with the
coldest irony.  "Yes; I am safe."

They turned away from each other in silence.



CHAPTER FIFTY SEVEN.

WHY TITO WAS SAFE.

Tito had good reasons for saying that he was safe.  In the last three
months, during which he had foreseen the discovery of the Medicean
conspirators as a probable event, he had had plenty of time to provide
himself with resources.  He had been strengthening his influence at Rome
and at Milan, by being the medium of secret information and indirect
measures against the Frate and the popular party; he had cultivated more
assiduously than ever the regard of this party, by showing subtle
evidence that his political convictions were entirely on their side; and
all the while, instead of withdrawing his agency from the Mediceans, he
had sought to be more actively employed and exclusively trusted by them.
It was easy to him to keep up this triple game.  The principle of
duplicity admitted by the Mediceans on their own behalf deprived them of
any standard by which they could measure the trustworthiness of a
colleague who had not, like themselves, hereditary interests, alliances,
and prejudices, which were intensely Medicean.  In their minds, to
deceive the opposite party was fair stratagem; to deceive their own
party was a baseness to which they felt no temptation; and, in using
Tito's facile ability, they were not keenly awake to the fact that the
absence of traditional attachments which made him a convenient agent was
also the absence of what among themselves was the chief guarantee of
mutual honour.  Again, the Roman and Milanese friends of the
aristocratic party, or Arrabbiati, who were the bitterest enemies of
Savonarola, carried on a system of underhand correspondence and
espionage, in which the deepest hypocrisy was the best service, and
demanded the heaviest pay; so that to suspect an agent because he played
a part strongly would have been an absurd want of logic.  On the other
hand, the Piagnoni of the popular party, who had the directness that
belongs to energetic conviction, were the more inclined to credit Tito
with sincerity in his political adhesion to them, because he affected no
religious sympathies.

By virtue of these conditions, the last three months had been a time of
flattering success to Tito.  The result he most cared for was the
securing of a future position for himself at Rome or at Milan; for he
had a growing determination, when the favourable moment should come, to
quit Florence for one of those great capitals where life was easier, and
the rewards of talent and learning were more splendid.  At present, the
scale dipped in favour of Milan; and if within the year he could render
certain services to Duke Ludovico Sforza, he had the prospect of a place
at the Milanese court which outweighed the advantages of Rome.

The revelation of the Medicean conspiracy, then, had been a subject of
forethought to Tito; but he had not been able to foresee the mode in
which it would be brought about.  The arrest of Lamberto dell' Antella
with a tell-tale letter on his person, and a bitter rancour against the
Medici in his heart, was an incalculable event.  It was not possible, in
spite of the careful pretexts with which his agency had been guarded,
that Tito should escape implication: he had never expected this in case
of any wide discovery concerning the Medicean plots.  But his quick mind
had soon traced out the course that would secure his own safety with the
fewest unpleasant concomitants.  It is agreeable to keep a whole skin;
but the skin still remains an organ sensitive to the atmosphere.

His reckoning had not deceived him.  That night, before he returned
home, he had secured the three results for which he most cared: he was
to be freed from all proceedings against him on account of complicity
with the Mediceans; he was to retain his secretaryship for another year,
unless he previously resigned it; and, lastly, the price by which he had
obtained these guarantees was to be kept as a State secret.  The price
would have been thought heavy by most men; and Tito himself would rather
not have paid it.

He had applied himself first to win the mind of Francesco Valori, who
was not only one of the Ten under whom he immediately held his
secretaryship, but one of the special council appointed to investigate
the evidence of the plot.  Francesco Valori, as we have seen, was the
head of the Piagnoni, a man with certain fine qualities that were not
incompatible with violent partisanship, with an arrogant temper that
alienated his friends, nor with bitter personal animosities--one of the
bitterest being directed against Bernardo del Nero.  To him, in a brief
private interview, after obtaining a pledge of secrecy, Tito avowed his
own agency for the Mediceans--an agency induced by motives about which
he was very frank, declaring at the same time that he had always
believed their efforts futile, and that he sincerely preferred the
maintenance of the popular government; affected to confide to Valori, as
a secret, his own personal dislike for Bernardo del Nero; and, after
this preparation, came to the important statement that there was another
Medicean plot, of which, if he obtained certain conditions from the
government, he could, by a journey to Siena and into Romagna, where
Piero de' Medici was again trying to gather forces, obtain documentary
evidence to lay before the council.  To this end it was essential that
his character as a Medicean agent should be unshaken for all Mediceans,
and hence the fact that he had been a source of information to the
authorities must be wrapped in profound secrecy.  Still, some odour of
the facts might escape in spite of precaution, and before Tito could
incur the unpleasant consequences of acting against his friends, he must
be assured of immunity from any prosecution as a Medicean, and from
deprivation of office for a year to come.

These propositions did not sound in the ear of Francesco Valori
precisely as they sound to us.  Valori's mind was not intensely bent on
the estimation of Tito's conduct; and it _was_ intensely bent on
procuring an extreme sentence against the five prisoners.  There were
sure to be immense efforts to save them; and it was to be wished (on
public grounds) that the evidence against them should be of the
strongest, so as to alarm all well-affected men at the dangers of
clemency.  The character of legal proceedings at that time implied that
evidence was one of those desirable things which could only be come at
by foul means.  To catch a few people and torture them into confessing
everybody's guilt was one step towards justice; and it was not always
easy to see the next, unless a traitor turned up.  Lamberto dell'
Antella had been tortured in aid of his previous willingness to tell
more than he knew; nevertheless, additional and stronger facts were
desirable, especially against Bernardo del Nero, who, so far as appeared
hitherto, had simply refrained from betraying the late plot after having
tried in vain to discourage it; for the welfare of Florence demanded
that the guilt of Bernardo del Nero should be put in the strongest
light.  So Francesco Valori zealously believed; and perhaps he was not
himself aware that the strength of his zeal was determined by his
hatred.  He decided that Tito's proposition ought to be accepted, laid
it before his colleagues without disclosing Tito's name, and won them
over to his opinion.  Late in the day, Tito was admitted to an audience
of the Special Council, and produced a deep sensation among them by
revealing another plot for insuring the mastery of Florence to Piero de'
Medici, which was to have been carried into execution in the middle of
this very month of August.  Documentary evidence on this subject would
do more than anything else to make the right course clear.  He received
a commission to start for Siena by break of day; and, besides this, he
carried away with him from the council-chamber a written guarantee of
his immunity and of his retention of office.

Among the twenty Florentines who bent their grave eyes on Tito, as he
stood gracefully before them, speaking of startling things with easy
periphrasis, and with that apparently unaffected admission of being
actuated by motives short of the highest, which is often the intensest
affectation, there were several whose minds were not too entirely
preoccupied to pass a new judgment on him in these new circumstances;
they silently concluded that this ingenious and serviceable Greek was in
future rather to be used for public needs than for private intimacy.
Unprincipled men were useful, enabling those who had more scruples to
keep their hands tolerably clean in a world where there was much dirty
work to be done.  Indeed, it was not clear to respectable Florentine
brains, unless they held the Frate's extravagant belief in a possible
purity and loftiness to be striven for on this earth, how life was to be
carried on in any department without human instruments whom it would not
be unbecoming to kick or to spit upon in the act of handing them their
wages.  Some of these very men who passed a tacit judgment on Tito were
shortly to be engaged in a memorable transaction that could by no means
have been carried through without the use of an unscrupulousness as
decided as his; but, as their own bright poet Pulci had said for them,
it is one thing to love the fruits of treachery, and another thing to
love traitors--

  "Il tradimento a molti piace assai,
  Ma il traditore a gnun non piacque mal."

The same society has had a gibbet for the murderer and a gibbet for the
martyr, an execrating hiss for a dastardly act, and as loud a hiss for
many a word of generous truthfulness or just insight: a mixed condition
of things which is the sign, not of hopeless confusion, but of
struggling order.

For Tito himself, he was not unaware that he had sunk a little in the
estimate, of the men who had accepted his services.  He had that degree
of self-contemplation which necessarily accompanies the habit of acting
on well-considered reasons, of whatever quality; and if he could have
chosen, he would have declined to see himself disapproved by men of the
world.  He had never meant to be disapproved; he had meant always to
conduct himself so ably that if he acted in opposition to the standard
of other men they should not be aware of it; and the barrier between
himself and Romola had been raised by the impossibility of such
concealment with her.  He shrank from condemnatory judgments as from a
climate to which he could not adapt himself But things were not so
plastic in the hands of cleverness as could be wished, and events had
turned out inconveniently.  He had really no rancour against Messer
Bernardo del Nero: he had a personal liking for Lorenzo Tornabuoni and
Giannozzo Pucci.  He had served them very ably, and in such a way that
if their party had been winners he would have merited high reward; but
was he to relinquish all the agreeable fruits of life because their
party had failed?  His proffer of a little additional proof against them
would probably have no influence on their fate; in fact, he felt
convinced they would escape any extreme consequences; but if he had not
given it, his own fortunes, which made a promising fabric, would have
been utterly ruined.  And what motive could any man really have, except
his own interest?  Florentines whose passions were engaged in their
petty and precarious political schemes might have no self-interest
separable from family pride and tenacity in old hatreds and attachments;
a modern simpleton who swallowed whole one of the old systems of
philosophy, and took the indigestion it occasioned for the signs of a
divine afflux or the voice of an inward monitor, might see his interest
in a form of self-conceit which he called self-rewarding virtue;
fanatics who believed in the coming Scourge and Renovation might see
their own interest in a future palm-branch and white robe: but no man of
clear intellect allowed his course to be determined by such puerile
impulses or questionable inward fumes.  Did not Pontanus, poet and
philosopher of unrivalled Latinity, make the finest possible oration at
Naples to welcome the French king, who had come to dethrone the learned
orator's royal friend and patron? and still Pontanus held up his head
and prospered.  Men did not really care about these things, except when
their personal spleen was touched.  It was weakness only that was
despised; power of any sort carried its immunity; and no man, unless by
very rare good fortune, could mount high in the world without incurring
a few unpleasant necessities which laid him open to enmity, and perhaps
to a little hissing, when enmity wanted a pretext.

It was a faint prognostic of that hissing, gathered by Tito from certain
indications when he was before the council, which gave his present
conduct the character of an epoch to him, and made him dwell on it with
argumentative vindication.  It was not that he was taking a deeper step
in wrong-doing, for it was not possible that he should feel any tie to
the Mediceans to be stronger than the tie to his father; but his conduct
to his father had been hidden by successful lying: his present act did
not admit of total concealment--in its very nature it was a revelation.
And Tito winced under his new liability to disesteem.

Well! a little patience, and in another year, or perhaps in half a year,
he might turn his back on these hard, eager Florentines, with their
futile quarrels and sinking fortunes.  His brilliant success at Florence
had had some ugly flaws in it: he had fallen in love with the wrong
woman, and Baldassarre had come back under incalculable circumstances.
But as Tito galloped with a loose rein towards Siena, he saw a future
before him in which he would no longer be haunted by those mistakes.  He
had much money safe out of Florence already; he was in the fresh
ripeness of eight-and-twenty; he was conscious of well-tried skill.
Could he not strip himself of the past, as of rehearsal clothing, and
throw away the old bundle, to robe himself for the real scene?

It did not enter into Tito's meditations on the future, that, on issuing
from the council-chamber and descending the stairs, he had brushed
against a man whose face he had not stayed to recognise in the
lamplight.  The man was Ser Ceccone--also willing to serve the State by
giving information against unsuccessful employers.



CHAPTER FIFTY EIGHT.

A FINAL UNDERSTANDING.

Tito soon returned from Siena, but almost immediately set out on another
journey, from which he did not return till the seventeenth of August.
Nearly a fortnight had passed since the arrest of the accused, and still
they were in prison, still their fate was uncertain.  Romola had felt
during this interval as if all cares were suspended for her, other than
watching the fluctuating probabilities concerning that fate.  Sometimes
they seemed strongly in favour of the prisoners; for the chances of
effective interest on their behalf were heightened by delay, and an
indefinite prospect of delay was opened by the reluctance of all persons
in authority to incur the odium attendant on any decision.  On the one
side there was a loud cry that the Republic was in danger, and that
lenity to the prisoners would be the signal of attack for all its
enemies; on the other, there was a certainty that a sentence of death
and confiscation of property passed on five citizens of distinguished
name, would entail the rancorous hatred of their relatives on all who
were conspicuously instrumental to such a sentence.

The final judgment properly lay with the Eight, who presided over the
administration of criminal justice; and the sentence depended on a
majority of six votes.  But the Eight shrank from their onerous
responsibility, and asked in this exceptional case to have it shared by
the Signoria (or the Gonfaloniere and the eight Priors).  The Signoria
in its turn shrugged its shoulders, and proposed the appeal to the Great
Council.  For, according to a law passed by the earnest persuasion of
Savonarola nearly three years before, whenever a citizen was condemned
to death by the fatal six votes (called the _set fave_ or _six beans_,
beans being in more senses than one the political pulse of Florence), he
had the right of appealing from that sentence to the Great Council.

But in this stage of the business, the friends of the accused resisted
the appeal, determined chiefly by the wish to gain delay; and, in fact,
strict legality required that sentence should have been passed prior to
the appeal.  Their resistance prevailed, and a middle course was taken;
the sentence was referred to a large assembly convened on the
seventeenth, consisting of all the higher magistracies, the smaller
council or Senate of Eighty, and a select number of citizens.

On this day Romola, with anxiety heightened by the possibility that
before its close her godfather's fate might be decided, had obtained
leave to see him for the second time, but only in the presence of
witnesses.  She had returned to the Via de' Bardi in company with her
cousin Brigida, still ignorant whether the council had come to any
decisive issue; and Monna Brigida had gone out again to await the
momentous news at the house of a friend belonging to one of the
magistracies, that she might bring back authentic tidings as soon as
they were to be had.

Romola had sunk on the first seat in the bright saloon, too much
agitated, too sick at heart, to care about her place, or be conscious of
discordance in the objects that surrounded her.  She sat with her back
to the door, resting her head on her hands.  It seemed a long while
since Monna Brigida had gone, and Romola was expecting her return.  But
when the door opened she knew it was not Monna Brigida who entered.

Since she had parted from Tito on that memorable night, she had had no
external proof to warrant her belief that he had won his safety by
treachery; on the contrary, she had had evidence that he was still
trusted by the Mediceans, and was believed by them to be accomplishing
certain errands of theirs in Romagna, under cover of fulfilling a
commission of the government.  For the obscurity in which the evidence
concerning the conspirators was shrouded allowed it to be understood
that Tito had escaped any implication.

But Romola's suspicion was not to be dissipated: her horror of his
conduct towards Baldassarre projected itself over every conception of
his acts; it was as if she had seen him committing a murder, and had had
a diseased impression ever after that his hands were covered with fresh
blood.

As she heard his step on the stone floor, a chill shudder passed through
her; she could not turn round, she could not rise to give any greeting.
He did not speak, but after an instant's pause took a seat on the other
side of the table just opposite to her.  Then she raised her eyes and
looked at him; but she was mute.  He did not show any irritation, but
said, coolly--

"This meeting corresponds with our parting, Romola.  But I understand
that it is a moment of terrible suspense.  I am come, however, if you
will listen to me, to bring you the relief of hope."

She started, and altered her position, but looked at him dubiously.

"It will not be unwelcome to you to hear--even though it is I who tell
it--that the council is prorogued till the twenty-first.  The Eight have
been frightened at last into passing a sentence of condemnation, but the
demand has now been made on behalf of the condemned for the Appeal to
the Great Council."

Romola's face lost its dubious expression; she asked eagerly--

"And when is it to be made?"

"It has not yet been granted; but it _may_ be granted.  The Special
Council is to meet again on the twenty-first to deliberate whether the
Appeal shall be allowed or not.  In the meantime there is an interval of
three days, in which chances may occur in favour of the prisoners--in
which interest may be used on their behalf."

Romola started from her seat.  The colour had risen to her face like a
visible thought, and her hands trembled.  In that moment her feeling
towards Tito was forgotten.

"Possibly," said Tito, also rising, "your own intention may have
anticipated what I was going to say.  You are thinking of the Frate."

"I am," said Romola, looking at him with surprise.  "Has he done
anything?  Is there anything to tell me?"

"Only this.  It was Messer Francesco Valori's bitterness and violence
which chiefly determined the course of things in the council to-day.
Half the men who gave in their opinion against the prisoners were
frightened into it, and there are numerous friends of Fra Girolamo both
in this Special Council and out of it who are strongly opposed to the
sentence of death--Piero Guicciardini, for example, who is one member of
the Signoria that made the stoutest resistance; and there is Giovan
Battista Ridolfi, who, Piagnone as he is, will not lightly forgive the
death of his brother Niccolo."

"But how can the Appeal be denied," said Romola, indignantly, "when it
is the law--when it was one of the chief glories of the popular
government to have passed the law?"

"They call this an exceptional case.  Of course there are ingenious
arguments, but there is much more of loud bluster about the danger of
the Republic.  But, you see, no opposition could prevent the assembly
from being prorogued, and a certain powerful influence rightly applied
during the next three days might determine the wavering courage of those
who desire that the Appeal should be granted, and might even give a
check to the headlong enmity of Francesco Valori.  It happens to have
come to my knowledge that the Frate has so far interfered as to send a
message to him in favour of Lorenzo Tornabuoni.  I know you can
sometimes have access to the Frate: it might at all events be worth
while to use your privilege now."

"It is true," said Romola, with an air of abstraction.  "I cannot
believe that the Frate would approve denying the Appeal."

"I heard it said by more than one person in the court of the Palazzo,
before I came away, that it would be to the everlasting discredit of Fra
Girolamo if he allowed a government which is almost entirely made up of
his party, to deny the Appeal, without entering his protest, when he has
been boasting in his books and sermons that it was he who got the law
passed.  [Note 1.]  But between ourselves, with all respect for your
Frate's ability, my Romola, he has got into the practice of preaching
that form of human sacrifices called killing tyrants and wicked
malcontents, which some of his followers are likely to think
inconsistent with lenity in the present case."

"I know, I know," said Romola, with a look and tone of pain.  "But he is
driven into those excesses of speech.  It used to be different.  I
_will_ ask for an interview.  I cannot rest without it.  I trust in the
greatness of his heart."

She was not looking at Tito; her eyes were bent with a vague gaze
towards the ground, and she had no distinct consciousness that the words
she heard came from her husband.

"Better lose no time, then," said Tito, with unmixed suavity, moving his
cap round in his hands as if he were about to put it on and depart.
"And now, Romola, you will perhaps be able to see, in spite of
prejudice, that my wishes go with yours in this matter.  You will not
regard the misfortune of my safety as an offence."

Something like an electric shock passed through Romola: it was the full
consciousness of her husband's presence returning to her.  She looked at
him without speaking.

"At least," he added, in a slightly harder tone, "you will endeavour to
base our intercourse on some other reasonings than that because an evil
deed is possible, _I_ have done it.  Am I alone to be beyond the pale of
your extensive charity?"

The feeling which had been driven back from Romola's lips a fortnight
before rose again with the gathered force of a tidal wave.  She spoke
with a decision which told him that she was careless of consequences.

"It is too late, Tito.  There is no killing the suspicion that deceit
has once begotten.  And now I know everything.  I know who that old man
was: he was your father, to whom you owe everything--to whom you owe
more than if you had been his own child.  By the side of that, it is a
small thing that you broke my trust and my father's.  As long as you
deny the truth about that old man, there is a horror rising between us:
the law that should make us one can never be obeyed.  I too am a human
being.  I have a soul of my own that abhors your actions.  Our union is
a pretence--as if a perpetual lie could be a sacred marriage."

Tito did not answer immediately.  When he did speak it was with a
calculated caution, that was stimulated by alarm.

"And you mean to carry out that independence by quitting me, I presume?"

"I desire to quit you," said Romola, impetuously.

"And supposing I do not submit to part with what the law gives me some
security for retaining?  You will then, of course, proclaim your reasons
in the ear of all Florence.  You will bring forward your mad assassin,
who is doubtless ready to obey your call, and you will tell the world
that you believe his testimony because he is so rational as to desire to
assassinate me.  You will first inform the Signoria that I am a Medicean
conspirator, and then you will inform the Mediceans that I have betrayed
them, and in both cases you will offer the excellent proof that you
believe me capable in general of everything bad.  It will certainly be a
striking position for a wife to adopt.  And if, on such evidence, you
succeed in holding me up to infamy, you will have surpassed all the
heroines of the Greek drama."

He paused a moment, but she stood mute.  He went on with the sense of
mastery.

"I believe you have no other grievance against me--except that I have
failed in fulfilling some lofty indefinite conditions on which you gave
me your wifely affection, so that, by withdrawing it, you have gradually
reduced me to the careful supply of your wants as a fair Piagnone of
high condition and liberal charities.  I think your success in gibbeting
me is not certain.  But doubtless you would begin by winning the ear of
Messer Bernardo del Nero?"

"Why do I speak of anything?" cried Romola, in anguish, sinking on her
chair again.  "It is hateful in me to be thinking of myself."

She did not notice when Tito left the room, or know how long it was
before the door opened to admit Monna Brigida.  But in that instant she
started up and said--

"Cousin, we must go to San Marco directly.  I must see my confessor, Fra
Salvestro."

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Note 1.  The most recent, and in some respects the best, biographer of
Savonarola, Signor Villari, endeavours to show that the Law of Appeal
ultimately enacted, being wider than the law originally contemplated by
Savonarola, was a source of bitter annoyance to him, as a contrivance of
the aristocratic party for attaching to the measures of the popular
government the injurious results of licence.  But in taking this view
the estimable biographer lost sight of the fact that, not only in his
sermons, but in a deliberately prepared book (the _Compendium
Revelationum_) written long after the Appeal had become law, Savonarola
enumerates among the benefits secured to Florence, "_the Appeal from the
Six Votes, advocated by me, for the greater security of the citizens_."



CHAPTER FIFTY NINE.

PLEADING.

The morning was in its early brightness when Romola was again on her way
to San Marco, having obtained through Fra Salvestro, the evening before,
the promise of an interview with Fra Girolamo in the chapter-house of
the convent.  The rigidity with which Savonarola guarded his life from
all the pretexts of calumny made such interviews very rare, and whenever
they were granted, they were kept free from any appearance of mystery.
For this reason the hour chosen was one at which there were likely to be
other visitors in the outer cloisters of San Marco.

She chose to pass through the heart of the city that she might notice
the signs of public feeling.  Every loggia, every convenient corner of
the piazza, every shop that made a rendezvous for gossips, was astir
with the excitement of gratuitous debate; a languishing trade tending to
make political discussion all the more vigorous.  It was clear that the
parties for and against the death of the conspirators were bent on
making the fullest use of the three days' interval in order to determine
the popular mood.  Already handbills were in circulation; some
presenting, in large print, the alternative of justice on the
conspirators or ruin to the Republic; others in equally large print
urging the observance of the law and the granting of the Appeal.  Round
these jutting islets of black capitals there were lakes of smaller
characters setting forth arguments less necessary to be read: for it was
an opinion entertained at that time (in the first flush of triumph at
the discovery of printing), that there was no argument more widely
convincing than question-begging phrases in large type.

Romola, however, cared especially to become acquainted with the
arguments in smaller type, and, though obliged to hasten forward, she
looked round anxiously as she went that she might miss no opportunity of
securing copies.  For a long way she saw none but such as were in the
hands of eager readers, or else fixed on the walls, from which in some
places the sbirri were tearing them down.  But at last, passing behind
San Giovanni with a quickened pace that she might avoid the many
acquaintances who frequented the piazza, she saw Bratti with a stock of
handbills which he appeared to be exchanging for small coin with the
passers-by.  She was too familiar with the humble life of Florence for
Bratti to be any stranger to her, and turning towards him she said,
"Have you two sorts of handbills, Bratti?  Let me have them quickly."

"Two sorts," said Bratti, separating the wet sheets with a slowness that
tried Romola's patience.  "There's `Law,' and there's `Justice.'"

"Which sort do you sell most of?"

"`Justice'--`Justice' goes the quickest,--so I raised the price, and
made it two danari.  But then I bethought me the `Law' was good ware
too, and had as good a right to be charged for as `Justice;' for people
set no store by cheap things, and if I sold the `Law' at one danaro, I
should be doing it a wrong.  And I'm a fair trader.  `Law,' or
`Justice,' it's all one to me; they're good wares.  I got 'em both for
nothing, and I sell 'em at a fair profit.  But you'll want more than one
of a sort?"

"No, no: here's a white quattrino for the two," said Romola, folding up
the bills and hurrying away.

She was soon in the outer cloisters of San Marco, where Fra Salvestro
was awaiting her under the cloister, but did not notice the approach of
her light step.  He was chatting, according to his habit, with lay
visitors; for under the auspices of a government friendly to the Frate,
the timidity about frequenting San Marco, which had followed on the
first shock of the Excommunication, had been gradually giving way.  In
one of these lay visitors she recognised a well-known satellite of
Francesco Valori, named Andrea Cambini, who was narrating or expounding
with emphatic gesticulation, while Fra Salvestro was listening with that
air of trivial curiosity which tells that the listener cares very much
about news and very little about its quality.  This characteristic of
her confessor, which was always repulsive to Romola, was made
exasperating to her at this moment by the certainty she gathered, from
the disjointed words which reached her ear, that Cambini was narrating
something relative to the fate of the conspirators.  She chose not to
approach the group, but as soon as she saw that she had arrested Fra
Salvestro's attention, she turned towards the door of the chapter-house,
while he, making a sign of approval, disappeared within the inner
cloister.  A lay Brother stood ready to open the door of the
chapter-house for her, and closed it behind her as she entered.

Once more looked at by those sad frescoed figures which had seemed to be
mourning with her at the death of her brother Dino, it was inevitable
that something of that scene should come back to her; but the intense
occupation of her mind with the present made the remembrance less a
retrospect than an indistinct recurrence of impressions which blended
themselves with her agitating fears, as if her actual anxiety were a
revival of the strong yearning she had once before brought to this
spot--to be repelled by marble rigidity.  She gave no space for the
remembrance to become more definite, for she at once opened the
handbills, thinking she should perhaps be able to read them in the
interval before Fra Girolamo appeared.  But by the time she had read to
the end of the one that recommended the observance of the law, the door
was opening, and doubling up the papers she stood expectant.

When the Frate had entered she knelt, according to the usual practice of
those who saw him in private; but as soon as he had uttered a
benedictory greeting she rose and stood opposite to him at a few yards'
distance.  Owing to his seclusion since he had been excommunicated, it
had been an unusually long while since she had seen him, and the late
months had visibly deepened in his face the marks of over-taxed mental
activity and bodily severities; and yet Romola was not so conscious of
this change as of another, which was less definable.  Was it that the
expression of serene elevation and pure human fellowship which had once
moved her was no longer present in the same force, or was it that the
sense of his being divided from her in her feeling about her godfather
roused the slumbering sources of alienation, and marred her own vision?
Perhaps both causes were at work.  Our relations with our fellow-men are
most often determined by coincident currents of that sort; the
inexcusable word or deed seldom comes until after affection or reverence
has been already enfeebled by the strain of repeated excuses.

It was true that Savonarola's glance at Romola had some of that hardness
which is caused by an egotistic prepossession.  He divined that the
interview she had sought was to turn on the fate of the conspirators, a
subject on which he had already had to quell inner voices that might
become loud again when encouraged from without.  Seated in his cell,
correcting the sheets of his `Triumph of the Cross,' it was easier to
repose on a resolution of neutrality.

"It is a question of moment, doubtless, on which you wished to see me,
my daughter," he began, in a tone which was gentle rather from
self-control than from immediate inclination.  "I know you are not wont
to lay stress on small matters."

"Father, you know what it is before I tell you," said Romola, forgetting
everything else as soon as she began to pour forth her plea.  "You know
what I am caring for--it is for the life of the old man I love best in
the world.  The thought of him has gone together with the thought of my
father as long as I remember the daylight.  That is my warrant for
coming to you, even if my coming should have been needless.  Perhaps it
is: perhaps you have already determined that your power over the hearts
of men shall be used to prevent them from denying to Florentines a right
which you yourself helped to earn for them."

"I meddle not with the functions of the State, my daughter," said Fra
Girolamo, strongly disinclined to reopen externally a debate which he
had already gone through inwardly.  "I have preached and laboured that
Florence should have a good government, for a good government is needful
to the perfecting of the Christian life; but I keep away my hands from
particular affairs which it is the office of experienced citizens to
administer."

"Surely, father--" Romola broke off.  She had uttered this first word
almost impetuously, but she was checked by the counter-agitation of
feeling herself in an attitude of remonstrance towards the man who had
been the source of guidance and strength to her.  In the act of
rebelling she was bruising her own reverence.

Savonarola was too keen not to divine something of the conflict that was
arresting her--too noble, deliberately to assume in calm speech that
self-justifying evasiveness into which he was often hurried in public by
the crowding impulses of the orator.

"Say what is in your heart; speak on, my daughter," he said, standing
with his arms laid one upon the other, and looking at her with quiet
expectation.

"I was going to say, father, that this matter is surely of higher moment
than many about which I have heard you preach and exhort fervidly.  If
it belonged to you to urge that men condemned for offences against the
State should have the right to appeal to the Great Council--if--" Romola
was getting eager again--"if you count it a glory to have won that right
for them, can it less belong to you to declare yourself against the
right being denied to almost the first men who need it?  Surely that
touches the Christian life more closely than whether you knew beforehand
that the Dauphin would die, or whether Pisa will be conquered."

There was a subtle movement, like a subdued sign of pain, in
Savonarola's strong lips, before he began to speak.

"My daughter, I speak as it is given me to speak--I am not master of the
times when I may become the vehicle of knowledge beyond the common
lights of men.  In this case I have no illumination beyond what wisdom
may give to those who are charged with the safety of the State.  As to
the law of Appeal against the Six Votes, I laboured to have it passed in
order that no Florentine should be subject to loss of life and goods
through the private hatred of a few who might happen to be in power; but
these five men, who have desired to overthrow a free government and
restore a corrupt tyrant, have been condemned with the assent of a large
assembly of their fellow-citizens.  They refused at first to have their
cause brought before the Great Council.  They have lost the right to the
appeal."

"How can they have lost it?" said Romola.  "It is the right to appeal
against condemnation, and they have never been condemned till now; and,
forgive me, father, it _is_ private hatred that would deny them the
appeal; it _is_ the violence of the few that frightens others; else why
was the assembly divided again directly after it had seemed to agree?
And if anything weighs against the observance of the law, let this weigh
for it--this, that you used to preach more earnestly than all else, that
there should be no place given to hatred and bloodshed because of these
party strifes, so that private ill-will should not find its
opportunities in public acts.  Father, you know that there is private
hatred concerned here: will it not dishonour you not to have interposed
on the side of mercy, when there are many who hold that it is also the
side of law and justice?"

"My daughter," said Fra Girolamo, with more visible emotion than before,
"there is a mercy which is weakness, and even treason against the common
good.  The safety of Florence, which means even more than the welfare of
Florentines, now demands severity, as it once demanded mercy.  It is not
only for a past plot that these men are condemned, but also for a plot
which has not yet been executed; and the devices that were leading to
its execution are not put an end to: the tyrant is still gathering his
forces in Romagna, and the enemies of Florence, who sit in the highest
places of Italy, are ready to hurl any stone that will crush her."

"What plot?" said Romola, reddening, and trembling with alarmed
surprise.

"You carry papers in your hand, I see," said Fra Girolamo, pointing to
the handbills.  "One of them will, perhaps, tell you that the government
has had new information."

Romola hastily opened the handbill she had not yet read, and saw that
the government had now positive evidence of a second plot, which was to
have been carried out in this August time.  To her mind it was like
reading a confirmation that Tito had won his safety by foul means; his
pretence of wishing that the Frate should exert himself on behalf of the
condemned only helped the wretched conviction.  She crushed up the paper
in her hand, and, turning to Savonarola, she said, with new passion,
"Father, what safety can there be for Florence when the worst man can
always escape?  And," she went on, a sudden flash of remembrance coming
from the thought about her husband, "have not you yourself encouraged
this deception which corrupts the life of Florence, by wanting more
favour to be shown to Lorenzo Tornabuoni, who has worn two faces, and
flattered you with a show of affection, when my godfather has always
been honest?  Ask all Florence who of those five men has the truest
heart, and there will not be many who will name any other name than
Bernardo del Nero.  You did interpose with Francesco Valori for the sake
of one prisoner: you have _not_ then been neutral; and you know that
your word will be powerful."

"I do not desire the death of Bernardo," said Savonarola, colouring
deeply.  "It would be enough if he were sent out of the city."

"Then why do you not speak to save an old man of seventy-five from dying
a death of ignominy--to give him at least the fair chances of the law?"
burst out Romola, the impetuosity of her nature so roused that she
forgot everything but her indignation.  "It is not that you feel bound
to be neutral; else why did you speak for Lorenzo Tornabuoni?  You spoke
for him because he is more friendly to San Marco; my godfather feigns no
friendship.  It is not, then, as a Medicean that my godfather is to die;
it is as a man you have no love for!"

When Romola paused, with cheeks glowing, and with quivering lips, there
was dead silence.  As she saw Fra Girolamo standing motionless before
her, she seemed to herself to be hearing her own words over again; words
that in this echo of consciousness were in strange, painful dissonance
with the memories that made part of his presence to her.  The moments of
silence were expanded by gathering compunction and self-doubt.  She had
committed sacrilege in her passion.  And even the sense that she could
retract nothing of her plea, that her mind could not submit itself to
Savonarola's negative, made it the more needful to her to satisfy those
reverential memories.  With a sudden movement towards him she said--

"Forgive me, father; it is pain to me to have spoken those words--yet I
cannot help speaking.  I am little and feeble compared with you; you
brought me light and strength.  But I submitted because I felt the
proffered strength--because I saw the light.  _Now_ I cannot see it.
Father, you yourself declare that there comes a moment when the soul
must have no guide but the voice within it, to tell whether the
consecrated thing has sacred virtue.  And therefore I must speak."

Savonarola had that readily-roused resentment towards opposition, hardly
separable from a power-loving and powerful nature, accustomed to seek
great ends that cast a reflected grandeur on the means by which they are
sought.  His sermons have much of that red flame in them.  And if he had
been a meaner man his susceptibility might have shown itself in
irritation at Romola's accusatory freedom, which was in strong contrast
with the deference he habitually received from his disciples.  But at
this moment such feelings were nullified by that hard struggle which
made half the tragedy of his life--the struggle of a mind possessed by a
never-silent hunger after purity and simplicity, yet caught in a tangle
of egoistic demands, false ideas, and difficult outward conditions, that
made simplicity impossible.  Keenly alive to all the suggestions of
Romola's remonstrating words, he was rapidly surveying, as he had done
before, the courses of action that were open to him, and their probable
results.  But it was a question on which arguments could seem decisive
only in proportion as they were charged with feeling, and he had
received no impulse that could alter his bias.  He looked at Romola, and
said--

"You have full pardon for your frankness, my daughter.  You speak, I
know, out of the fulness of your family affections.  But these
affections must give way to the needs of the Republic.  If those men who
have a close acquaintance with the affairs of the State believe, as I
understand they do, that the public safety requires the extreme
punishment of the law to fall on the five conspirators, I cannot control
their opinion, seeing that I stand aloof from such affairs."

"Then you desire that they should die?  You desire that the Appeal
should be denied them?" said Romola, feeling anew repelled by a
vindication which seemed to her to have the nature of a subterfuge.

"I have said that I do not desire their death."

"Then," said Romola, her indignation rising again, "you can be
indifferent that Florentines should inflict death which you do not
desire, when you might have protested against it--when you might have
helped to hinder it, by urging the observance of a law which you held it
good to get passed.  Father, you used not to stand aloof: you used not
to shrink from protesting.  Do not say you cannot protest where the
lives of men are concerned; say rather, you desire their death.  Say
rather, you hold it good for Florence that there shall be more blood and
more hatred.  Will the death of five Mediceans put an end to parties in
Florence?  Will the death of a noble old man like Bernardo del Nero save
a city that holds such men as Dolfo Spini?"

"My daughter, it is enough.  The cause of freedom, which is the cause of
God's kingdom upon earth, is often most injured by the enemies who carry
within them the power of certain human virtues.  The wickedest man is
often not the most insurmountable obstacle to the triumph of good."

"Then why do you say again, that you do not desire my godfather's
death?" said Romola, in mingled anger and despair.  "Rather, you hold it
the more needful he should die because he is the better man.  I cannot
unravel your thoughts, father; I cannot hear the real voice of your
judgment and conscience."

There was a moment's pause.  Then Savonarola said, with keener emotion
than he had yet shown--

"Be thankful, my daughter, if your own soul has been spared perplexity;
and judge not those to whom a harder lot has been given.  _You_ see one
ground of action in this matter.  I see many.  I have to choose that
which will farther the work intrusted to me.  The end I seek is one to
which minor respects must be sacrificed.  The death of five men--were
they less guilty than these--is a light matter weighed against the
withstanding of the vicious tyrannies which stifle the life of Italy,
and foster the corruption of the Church; a light matter weighed against
the furthering of God's kingdom upon earth, the end for which I live and
am willing myself to die."

Under any other circumstances, Romola would have been sensitive to the
appeal at the beginning of Savonarola's speech; but at this moment she
was so utterly in antagonism with him, that what he called perplexity
seemed to her sophistry and doubleness; and as he went on, his words
only fed that flame of indignation, which now again, more fully than
ever before, lit up the memory of all his mistakes, and made her trust
in him seem to have been a purblind delusion.  She spoke almost with
bitterness.

"Do you, then, know so well what will further the coming of God's
kingdom, father, that you will dare to despise the plea of mercy--of
justice--of faithfulness to your own teaching?  Has the French king,
then, brought renovation to Italy?  Take care, father, lest your enemies
have some reason when they say, that in your visions of what will
further God's kingdom you see only what will strengthen your own party."

"And that is true!" said Savonarola, with flashing eyes.  Romola's voice
had seemed to him in that moment the voice of his enemies.  "The cause
of my party _is_ the cause of God's kingdom."

"I do not believe it!" said Romola, her whole frame shaken with
passionate repugnance.  "God's kingdom is something wider--else, let me
stand outside it with the beings that I love."

The two faces were lit up, each with an opposite emotion, each with an
opposite certitude.  Further words were impossible.  Romola hastily
covered her head and went out in silence.



CHAPTER SIXTY.

THE SCAFFOLD.

Three days later the moon that was just surmounting the buildings of the
piazza in front of the Old Palace within the hour of midnight, did not
make the usual broad lights and shadows on the pavement.  Not a
hand's-breadth of pavement was to be seen, but only the heads of an
eager struggling multitude.  And instead of that background of silence
in which the pattering footsteps and buzzing voices, the lute-thrumming
or rapid scampering of the many night wanderers of Florence stood out in
obtrusive distinctness, there was the background of a roar from mingled
shouts and imprecations, tramplings and pushings, and accidental
clashing of weapons, across which nothing was distinguishable but a
darting shriek, or the heavy dropping toll of a bell.

Almost all who could call themselves the public of Florence were awake
at that hour, and either enclosed within the limits of that piazza, or
struggling to enter it.  Within the palace were still assembled in the
council-chamber all the chief magistracies, the eighty members of the
senate, and the other select citizens who had been in hot debate through
long hours of daylight and torchlight whether the Appeal should be
granted or whether the sentence of death should be executed on the
prisoners forthwith, to forestall the dangerous chances of delay.  And
the debate had been so much like fierce quarrel that the noise from the
council-chamber had reached the crowd outside.  Only within the last
hour had the question been decided: the Signoria had remained divided,
four of them standing out resolutely for the Appeal in spite of the
strong argument that if they did not give way their houses should be
sacked, until Francesco Valori, in brief and furious speech, made the
determination of his party more ominously distinct by declaring that if
the Signoria would not defend the liberties of the Florentine people by
executing those five perfidious citizens, there would not be wanting
others who would take that cause in hand to the peril of all who opposed
it.  The Florentine Cato triumphed.  When the votes were counted again,
the four obstinate white beans no longer appeared; the whole nine were
of the fatal affirmative black, deciding the death of the five prisoners
without delay--deciding also, only tacitly and with much more delay, the
death of Francesco Valori.

And now, while the judicial Eight were gone to the Bargello to prepare
for the execution, the five condemned men were being led barefoot and in
irons through the midst of the council.  It was their friends who had
contrived this: would not Florentines be moved by the visible
association of such cruel ignominy with two venerable men like Bernardo
del Nero and Niccolo Ridolfi, who had taken their bias long before the
new order of things had come to make Mediceanism retrograde--with two
brilliant popular young men like Tornabuoni and Pucci, whose absence
would be felt as a haunting vacancy wherever there was a meeting of
chief Florentines?  It was useless: such pity as could be awakened now
was of that hopeless sort which leads not to rescue, but to the tardier
action of revenge.

While this scene was passing upstairs Romola stood below against one of
the massive pillars in the court of the palace, expecting the moment
when her godfather would appear, on his way to execution.  By the use of
strong interest she had gained permission to visit him in the evening of
this day, and remain with him until the result of the council should be
determined.  And now she was waiting with his confessor to follow the
guard that would lead him to the Bargello.  Her heart was bent on
clinging to the presence of the childless old man to the last moment, as
her father would have done; and she had overpowered all remonstrances.
Giovan Battista Ridolfi, a disciple of Savonarola, who was going in
bitterness to behold the death of his elder brother Niccolo, had
promised that she should be guarded, and now stood by her side.

Tito, too, was in the palace; but Romola had not seen him.  Since the
evening of the seventeenth they had avoided each other, and Tito only
knew by inference from the report of the Frate's neutrality that her
pleading had failed.  He was now surrounded with official and other
personages, both Florentine and foreign, who had been awaiting the issue
of the long-protracted council, maintaining, except when he was directly
addressed, the subdued air and grave silence of a man whom actual events
are placing in a painful state of strife between public and private
feeling.  When an allusion was made to his wife in relation to those
events, he implied that, owing to the violent excitement of her mind,
the mere fact of his continuing to hold office under a government
concerned in her godfather's condemnation, roused in her a diseased
hostility towards him; so that for her sake he felt it best not to
approach her.

"Ah, the old Bardi blood!" said Cennini, with a shrug.  "I shall not be
surprised if this business shakes _her_ loose from the Frate, as well as
some others I could name."

"It is excusable in a woman, who is doubtless beautiful, since she is
the wife of Messer Tito," said a young French envoy, smiling and bowing
to Tito, "to think that her affections must overrule the good of the
State, and that nobody is to be beheaded who is anybody's cousin; but
such a view is not to be encouraged in the male population.  It seems to
me your Florentine polity is much weakened by it."

"That is true," said Niccolo Macchiavelli; "but where personal ties are
strong, the hostilities they raise must be taken due account of.  Many
of these half-way severities are mere hot-headed blundering.  The only
safe blows to be inflicted on men and parties are the blows that are too
heavy to be avenged."

"Niccolo," said Cennini, "there is a clever wickedness in thy talk
sometimes that makes me mistrust thy pleasant young face as if it were a
mask of Satan."

"Not at all, my good Domenico," said Macchiavelli, smiling, and laying
his hand on the elder's shoulder.  "Satan was a blunderer, an introducer
of _novita_, who made a stupendous failure.  If he had succeeded, we
should all have been worshipping him, and his portrait would have been
more flattered."

"Well, well," said Cennini, "I say not thy doctrine is not too clever
for Satan: I only say it is wicked enough for him."

"I tell you," said Macchiavelli, "my doctrine is the doctrine of all men
who seek an end a little farther off than their own noses.  Ask our
Frate, our prophet, how his universal renovation is to be brought about:
he will tell you, first, by getting a free and pure government; and
since it appears that this cannot be done by making all Florentines love
each other, it must be done by cutting off every head that happens to be
obstinately in the way.  Only if a man incurs odium by sanctioning a
severity that is not thorough enough to be final, he commits a blunder.
And something like that blunder, I suspect, the Frate has committed.  It
was an occasion on which he might have won some lustre by exerting
himself to maintain the Appeal; instead of that, he has lost lustre, and
has gained no strength."

Before any one else could speak, there came the expected announcement
that the prisoners were about to leave the council-chamber; and the
majority of those who were present hurried towards the door, intent on
securing the freest passage to the Bargello in the rear of the
prisoners' guard; for the scene of the execution was one that drew alike
those who were moved by the deepest passions and those who were moved by
the coldest curiosity.

Tito was one of those who remained behind.  He had a native repugnance
to sights of death and pain, and five days ago whenever he had thought
of this execution as a possibility he had hoped that it would not take
place, and that the utmost sentence would be exile: his own safety
demanded no more.  But now he felt that it would be a welcome guarantee
of his security when he had learned that Bernardo del Nero's head was
off the shoulders.  The new knowledge and new attitude towards him
disclosed by Romola on the day of his return, had given him a new dread
of the power she possessed to make his position insecure.  If any act of
hers only succeeded in making him an object of suspicion and odium, he
foresaw not only frustration, but frustration under unpleasant
circumstances.  Her belief in Baldassarre had clearly determined her
wavering feelings against further submission, and if her godfather lived
she would win him to share her belief without much trouble.  Romola
seemed more than ever an unmanageable fact in his destiny.  But if
Bernardo del Nero were dead, the difficulties that would beset her in
placing herself in opposition to her husband would probably be
insurmountable to her shrinking pride.  Therefore Tito had felt easier
when he knew that the Eight had gone to the Bargello to order the
instant erection of the scaffold.  Four other men--his intimates and
confederates--were to die, besides Bernardo del Nero.  But a man's own
safety is a god that sometimes makes very grim demands.  Tito felt them
to be grim: even in the pursuit of what was agreeable, this paradoxical
life forced upon him the desire for what was disagreeable.  But he had
had other experience of this sort, and as he heard through the open
doorway the shuffle of many feet and the clanking of metal on the
stairs, he was able to answer the questions of the young French envoy
without showing signs of any other feeling than that of sad resignation
to State necessities.

Those sounds fell on Romola as if her power of hearing had been exalted
along with every other sensibility of her nature.  She needed no arm to
support her; she shed no tears.  She felt that intensity of life which
seems to transcend both grief and joy--in which the mind seems to itself
akin to elder forces that wrought out existence before the birth of
pleasure and pain.  Since her godfather's fate had been decided, the
previous struggle of feeling in her had given way to an identification
of herself with him in these supreme moments: she was inwardly asserting
for him that, if he suffered the punishment of treason, he did not
deserve the name of traitor; he was the victim to a collision between
two kinds of faithfulness.  It was not given him to die for the noblest
cause, and yet he died because of his nobleness.  He might have been a
meaner man and found it easier not to incur this guilt.  Romola was
feeling the full force of that sympathy with the individual lot that is
continually opposing itself to the formulae by which actions and parties
are judged.  She was treading the way with her second father to the
scaffold, and nerving herself to defy ignominy by the consciousness that
it was not deserved.

The way was fenced in by three hundred armed men, who had been placed as
a guard by the orders of Francesco Valori, for among the apparent
contradictions that belonged to this event, not the least striking was
the alleged alarm on the one hand at the popular rage against the
conspirators, and the alleged alarm on the other lest there should be an
attempt to rescue them in the midst of a hostile crowd.  When they had
arrived within the court of the Bargello, Romola was allowed to approach
Bernardo with his confessor for a moment of farewell.  Many eyes were
bent on them even in that struggle of an agitated throng, as the aged
man, forgetting that his hands were bound with irons, lifted them
towards the golden head that was bent towards him, and then, checking
that movement, leaned to kiss her.  She seized the fettered hands that
were hung down again, and kissed them as if they had been sacred things.

"My poor Romola," said Bernardo, in a low voice, "I have only to die,
but thou hast to live--and I shall not be there to help thee."

"Yes," said Romola, hurriedly, "you _will_ help me--always--because I
shall remember you."

She was taken away and conducted up the flight of steps that led to the
loggia surrounding the grand old court.  She took her place there,
determined to look till the moment when her godfather laid his head on
the block.  Now while the prisoners were allowed a brief interval with
their confessor, the spectators were pressing into court until the crowd
became dense around the black scaffold, and the torches fixed in iron
rings against the pillars threw a varying startling light at one moment
on passionless stone carvings, at another on some pale face agitated
with suppressed rage or suppressed grief--the face of one among the many
near relatives of the condemned, who were presently to receive their
dead and carry them home.

Romola's face looked like a marble image against the dark arch as she
stood watching for the moment when her godfather would appear at the
foot of the scaffold.  He was to suffer first, and Battista Ridolfi, who
was by her side, had promised to take her away through a door behind
them when she would have seen the last look of the man who alone in all
the world had shared her pitying love for her father.  And still, in the
background of her thought, there was the possibility striving to be a
hope, that some rescue might yet come, something that would keep that
scaffold unstained by blood.

For a long while there was constant movement, lights flickering, heads
swaying to and fro, confused voices within the court, rushing waves of
sound through the entrance from without.  It seemed to Romola as if she
were in the midst of a storm-troubled sea, caring nothing about the
storm, caring only to hold out a signal till the eyes that looked for it
could seek it no more.

Suddenly there was stillness, and the very tapers seemed to tremble into
quiet.  The executioner was ready on the scaffold, and Bernardo del Nero
was seen ascending it with a slow firm step.  Romola made no visible
movement, uttered not even a suppressed sound: she stood more firmly,
caring for _his_ firmness.  She saw him pause, saw the white head kept
erect, while he said, in a voice distinctly audible--

"It is but a short space of life that my fellow-citizens have taken from
me."

She perceived that he was gazing slowly round him as he spoke.  She felt
that his eyes were resting on her, and that she was stretching out her
arms towards him.  Then she saw no more till--a long while after, as it
seemed--a voice said, "My daughter, all is peace now.  I can conduct you
to your house."

She uncovered her head and saw her godfather's confessor standing by
her, in a room where there were other grave men talking in subdued
tones.

"I am ready," she said, starting up.  "Let us lose no time."

She thought all clinging was at an end for her: all her strength now
should be given to escape from a grasp under which she shuddered.



CHAPTER SIXTY ONE.

DRIFTING AWAY.

On the eighth day from that memorable night Romola was standing on the
brink of the Mediterranean, watching the gentle summer pulse of the sea
just above what was then the little fishing village of Viareggio.

Again she had fled from Florence, and this time no arresting voice had
called her back.  Again she wore the grey religious dress; and this
time, in her heart-sickness, she did not care that it was a disguise.  A
new rebellion had risen within her, a new despair.  Why should she care
about wearing one badge more than another, or about being called by her
own name?  She despaired of finding any consistent duty belonging to
that name.  What force was there to create for her that supremely
hallowed motive which men call duty, but which can have no inward
constraining existence save through some form of believing love?

The bonds of all strong affection were snapped.  In her marriage, the
highest bond of all, she had ceased to see the mystic union which is its
own guarantee of indissolubleness, had ceased even to see the obligation
of a voluntary pledge: had she not proved that the things to which she
had pledged herself were impossible?  The impulse to set herself free
had risen again with overmastering force; yet the freedom could only be
an exchange of calamity.  There is no compensation for the woman who
feels that the chief relation of her life has been no more than a
mistake.  She has lost her crown.  The deepest secret of human
blessedness has half whispered itself to her, and then for ever passed
her by.

And now Romola's best support under that supreme woman's sorrow had
slipped away from her.  The vision of any great purpose, any end of
existence which could ennoble endurance and exalt the common deeds of a
dusty life with divine ardours, was utterly eclipsed for her now by the
sense of a confusion in human things which made all effort a mere
dragging at tangled threads; all fellowship, either for resistance or
advocacy, mere unfairness and exclusiveness.  What, after all, was the
man who had represented for her the highest heroism: the heroism not of
hard, self-contained endurance, but of willing, self-offering love?
What was the cause he was struggling for?  Romola had lost her trust in
Savonarola, had lost that fervour of admiration which had made her
unmindful of his aberrations, and attentive only to the grand curve of
his orbit.  And now that her keen feeling for her godfather had thrown
her into antagonism with the Frate, she saw all the repulsive and
inconsistent details in his teaching with a painful lucidity which
exaggerated their proportions.  In the bitterness of her disappointment
she said that his striving after the renovation of the Church and the
world was a striving after a mere name which told no more than the title
of a book: a name that had come to mean practically the measures that
would strengthen his own position in Florence; nay, often questionable
deeds and words, for the sake of saving his influence from suffering by
his own errors.  And that political reform which had once made a new
interest in her life seemed now to reduce itself to narrow devices for
the safety of Florence, in contemptible contradiction with the
alternating professions of blind trust in the Divine care.

It was inevitable that she should judge the Frate unfairly on a question
of individual suffering, at which she looked with the eyes of personal
tenderness, and _he_ with the eyes of theoretic conviction.  In that
declaration of his, that the cause of his party was the cause of God's
kingdom, she heard only the ring of egoism.  Perhaps such words have
rarely been uttered without that meaner ring in them; yet they are the
implicit formula of all energetic belief.  And if such energetic belief,
pursuing a grand and remote end, is often in danger of becoming a
demon-worship, in which the votary lets his son and daughter pass
through the fire with a readiness that hardly looks like sacrifice;
tender fellow-feeling for the nearest has its danger too, and is apt to
be timid and sceptical towards the larger aims without which life cannot
rise into religion.  In this way poor Romola was being blinded by her
tears.

No one who has ever known what it is thus to lose faith in a fellow-man
whom he has profoundly loved and reverenced, will lightly say that the
shock can leave the faith in the Invisible Goodness unshaken.  With the
sinking of high human trust, the dignity of life sinks too; we cease to
believe in our own better self, since that also is part of the common
nature which is degraded in our thought; and all the finer impulses of
the soul are dulled.  Romola felt even the springs of her once active
pity drying up, and leaving her to barren egoistic complaining.  Had not
_she_ had her sorrows too?  And few had cared for her, while she had
cared for many.  She had done enough; she had striven after the
impossible, and was weary of this stifling crowded life.  She longed for
that repose in mere sensation which she had sometimes dreamed of in the
sultry afternoons of her early girlhood, when she had fancied herself
floating naiad-like in the waters.

The clear waves seemed to invite her: she wished she could lie down to
sleep on them and pass from sleep into death.  But Romola could not
directly seek death; the fulness of young life in her forbade that.  She
could only wish that death would come.

At the spot where she had paused there was a deep bend in the shore, and
a small boat with a sail was moored there.  In her longing to glide over
the waters that were getting golden with the level sun-rays, she thought
of a story which had been one of the things she had loved to dwell on in
Boccaccio, when her father fell asleep and she glided from her stool to
sit on the floor and read the `Decamerone.'  It was the story of that
fair Gostanza who in her lovelorn-ness desired to live no longer, but
not having the courage to attack her young life, had put herself into a
boat and pushed off to sea; then, lying down in the boat, had wrapt her
mantle round her head, hoping to be wrecked, so that her fear would be
helpless to flee from death.  The memory had remained a mere thought in
Romola's mind, without budding into any distinct wish; but now, as she
paused again in her walking to and fro, she saw gliding black against
the red gold another boat with one man in it, making towards the bend
where the first and smaller boat was moored.  Walking on again, she at
length saw the man land, pull his boat ashore and begin to unload
something from it.  He was perhaps the owner of the smaller boat also:
he would be going away soon, and her opportunity would be gone with
him--her opportunity of buying that smaller boat.  She had not yet
admitted to herself that she meant to use it, but she felt a sudden
eagerness to secure the possibility of using it, which disclosed the
half-unconscious growth of a thought into a desire.

"Is that little boat yours also?" she said to the fisherman, who had
looked up, a little startled by the tall grey figure, and had made a
reverence to this holy Sister wandering thus mysteriously in the evening
solitude.

It _was_ his boat; an old one, hardly seaworthy, yet worth repairing to
any man who would buy it.  By the blessing of San Antonio, whose chapel
was in the village yonder, his fishing had prospered, and he had now a
better boat, which had once been Gianni's who died.  But he had not yet
sold the old one.  Romola asked him how much it was worth, and then,
while he was busy, thrust the price into a little satchel lying on the
ground and containing the remnant of his dinner.  After that, she
watched him furling his sail and asked him how he should set it if he
wanted to go out to sea, and then pacing up and down again, waited to
see him depart.

The imagination of herself gliding away in that boat on the darkening
waters was growing more and more into a longing, as the thought of a
cool brook in sultriness becomes a painful thirst.  To be freed from the
burden of choice when all motive was bruised, to commit herself,
sleeping, to destiny which would either bring death or else new
necessities that might rouse a new life in her!--it was a thought that
beckoned her the more because the soft evening air made her long to rest
in the still solitude, instead of going back to the noise and heat of
the village.

At last the slow fisherman had gathered up all his movables and was
walking away.  Soon the gold was shrinking and getting duskier in sea
and sky, and there was no living thing in sight, no sound but the
lulling monotony of the lapping waves.  In this sea there was no tide
that would help to carry her away if she waited for its ebb; but Romola
thought the breeze from the land was rising a little.  She got into the
boat, unfurled the sail, and fastened it as she had learned in that
first brief lesson.  She saw that it caught the light breeze, and this
was all she cared for.  Then she loosed the boat from its moorings, and
tried to urge it with an oar, till she was far out from the land, till
the sea was dark even to the west, and the stars were disclosing
themselves like a palpitating life over the wide heavens.  Resting at
last, she threw back her cowl, and, taking off the kerchief underneath,
which confined her hair, she doubled them both under her head for a
pillow on one of the boat's ribs.  The fair head was still very young
and could bear a hard pillow.

And so she lay, with the soft night air breathing on her while she
glided on the water and watched the deepening quiet of the sky.  She was
alone now: she had freed herself from all claims, she had freed herself
even from that burden of choice which presses with heavier and heavier
weight when claims have loosed their guiding hold.

Had she found anything like the dream of her girlhood?  No.  Memories
hung upon her like the weight of broken wings that could never be
lifted--memories of human sympathy which even in its pains leaves a
thirst that the Great Mother has no milk to still.  Romola felt orphaned
in those wide spaces of sea and sky.  She read no message of love for
her in that far-off symbolic writing of the heavens, and with a great
sob she wished that she might be gliding into death.

She drew the cowl over her head again and covered her face, choosing
darkness rather than the light of the stars, which seemed to her like
the hard light of eyes that looked at her without seeing her.  Presently
she felt that she was in the grave, but not resting there: she was
touching the hands of the beloved dead beside her, and trying to wake
them.



CHAPTER SIXTY TWO.

THE BENEDICTION.

About ten o'clock on the morning of the twenty-seventh of February the
currents of passengers along the Florentine streets set decidedly
towards San Marco.  It was the last morning of the Carnival, and every
one knew there was a second Bonfire of Vanities being prepared in front
of the Old Palace; but at this hour it was evident that the centre of
popular interest lay elsewhere.

The Piazza di San Marco was filled by a multitude who showed no other
movement than that which proceeded from the pressure of new-comers
trying to force their way forward from all the openings: but the front
ranks were already close-serried and resisted the pressure.  Those ranks
were ranged around a semicircular barrier in front of the church, and
within this barrier were already assembling the Dominican Brethren of
San Marco.

But the temporary wooden pulpit erected over the church-door was still
empty.  It was presently to be entered by the man whom the Pope's
command had banished from the pulpit of the Duomo, whom the other
ecclesiastics of Florence had been forbidden to consort with, whom the
citizens had been forbidden to hear on pain of excommunication.  This
man had said, "A wicked, unbelieving Pope who has gained the pontifical
chair by bribery is not Christ's Vicar.  His curses are broken swords:
he grasps a hilt without a blade.  His commands are contrary to the
Christian life: it is lawful to disobey them--nay, _it is not lawful to
obey them_."  And the people still flocked to hear him as he preached in
his own church of San Marco, though the Pope was hanging terrible
threats over Florence if it did not renounce the pestilential schismatic
and send him to Rome to be "converted"--still, as on this very morning,
accepted the Communion from his excommunicated hands.  For how if this
Frate had really more command over the Divine lightnings than that
official successor of Saint Peter?  It was a momentous question, which
for the mass of citizens could never be decided by the Frate's ultimate
test, namely, what was and what was not accordant with the highest
spiritual law.  No: in such a case as this, if God had chosen the Frate
as his prophet to rebuke the High Priest who carried the mystic raiment
unworthily, he would attest his choice by some unmistakable sign.  As
long as the belief in the Prophet carried no threat of outward calamity,
but rather the confident hope of exceptional safety, no sign was needed:
his preaching was a music to which the people felt themselves marching
along the way they wished to go; but now that belief meant an immediate
blow to their commerce, the shaking of their position among the Italian
States, and an interdict on their city, there inevitably came the
question, "What miracle showest thou?"  Slowly at first, then faster and
faster, that fatal demand had been swelling in Savonarola's ear,
provoking a response, outwardly in the declaration that at the fitting
time the miracle would come; inwardly in the faith--not unwavering, for
what faith is so?--that if the need for miracle became urgent, the work
he had before him was too great for the Divine power to leave it
halting.  His faith wavered, but not his speech: it is the lot of every
man who has to speak for the satisfaction of the crowd, that he must
often speak in virtue of yesterday's faith, hoping it will come back
to-morrow.

It was in preparation for a scene which was really a response to the
popular impatience for some supernatural guarantee of the Prophet's
mission, that the wooden pulpit had been erected above the church-door.
But while the ordinary Frati in black mantles were entering and
arranging themselves, the faces of the multitude were not yet eagerly
directed towards the pulpit: it was felt that Savonarola would not
appear just yet, and there was some interest in singling out the various
monks, some of them belonging to high Florentine families, many of them
having fathers, brothers, or cousins among the artisans and shopkeepers
who made the majority of the crowd.  It was not till the tale of monks
was complete, not till they had fluttered their books and had begun to
chant, that people said to each other, "Fra Girolamo must be coming
now."

That expectation rather than any spell from the accustomed wail of
psalmody was what made silence and expectation seem to spread like a
paling solemn light over the multitude of upturned faces, all now
directed towards the empty pulpit.

The next instant the pulpit was no longer empty.  A figure covered from
head to foot in black cowl and mantle had entered it, and was kneeling
with bent head and with face turned away.  It seemed a weary time to the
eager people while the black figure knelt and the monks chanted.  But
the stillness was not broken, for the Frate's audiences with Heaven were
yet charged with electric awe for that mixed multitude, so that those
who had already the will to stone him felt their arms unnerved.

At last there was a vibration among the multitude, each seeming to give
his neighbour a momentary aspen-like touch, as when men who have been
watching for something in the heavens see the expected presence silently
disclosing itself.  The Frate had risen, turned towards the people, and
partly pushed back his cowl.  The monotonous wail of psalmody had
ceased, and to those who stood near the pulpit, it was as if the sounds
which had just been filling their ears had suddenly merged themselves in
the force of Savonarola's flashing glance, as he looked round him in the
silence.  Then he stretched out his hands, which, in their exquisite
delicacy, seemed transfigured from an animal organ for grasping into
vehicles of sensibility too acute to need any gross contact: hands that
came like an appealing speech from that part of his soul which was
masked by his strong passionate face, written on now with deeper lines
about the mouth and brow than are made by forty-four years of ordinary
life.

At the first stretching out of the hands some of the crowd in the front
ranks fell on their knees, and here and there a devout disciple farther
off; but the great majority stood firm, some resisting the impulse to
kneel before this excommunicated man (might not a great judgment fall
upon him even in this act of blessing?)--others jarred with scorn and
hatred of the ambitious deceiver who was getting up this new comedy,
before which, nevertheless, they felt themselves impotent, as before the
triumph of a fashion.

But then came the voice, clear and low at first, uttering the words of
absolution--"_Misereatur vestri_"--and more fell on their knees: and as
it rose higher and yet clearer, the erect heads became fewer and fewer,
till, at the words "_Benedicat vos omnipotens Deus_" it rose to a
masculine cry, as if protesting its power to bless under the clutch of a
demon that wanted to stifle it: it rang like a trumpet to the
extremities of the Piazza, and under it every head was bowed.

After the utterance of that blessing, Savonarola himself fell on his
knees and hid his face in temporary exhaustion.  Those great jets of
emotion were a necessary part of his life; he himself had said to the
people long ago, "Without preaching I cannot live."  But it was a life
that shattered him.

In a few minutes more, some had risen to their feet, but a larger number
remained kneeling, and all faces were intently watching him.  He had
taken into his hands a crystal vessel, containing the consecrated Host,
and was about to address the people.

"You remember, my children, three days ago I besought you, when I should
hold this Sacrament in my hand in the face of you all, to pray fervently
to the Most High that if this work of mine does not come from Him, He
will send a fire and consume me, that I may vanish into the eternal
darkness away from His light which I have hidden with my falsity.  Again
I beseech you to make that prayer, and to make it _now_."

It was a breathless moment: perhaps no man really prayed, if some in a
spirit of devout obedience made the effort to pray.  Every consciousness
was chiefly possessed by the sense that Savonarola was praying, in a
voice not loud, but distinctly audible in the wide stillness.

"Lord, if I have not wrought in sincerity of soul, if my word cometh not
from Thee, strike me in this moment with Thy thunder, and let the fires
of Thy wrath enclose me."

He ceased to speak, and stood motionless, with the consecrated Mystery
in his hand, with eyes uplifted, and a quivering excitement in his whole
aspect.  Every one else was motionless and silent too, while the
sunlight, which for the last quarter of an hour had here and there been
piercing the greyness, made fitful streaks across the convent wall,
causing some awe-stricken spectators to start timidly.  But soon there
was a wider parting, and with a gentle quickness, like a smile, a stream
of brightness poured itself on the crystal vase, and then spread itself
over Savonarola's face with mild glorification.

An instantaneous shout rang through the Piazza, "Behold the answer!"

The warm radiance thrilled through Savonarola's frame, and so did the
shout.  It was his last moment of untroubled triumph, and in its
rapturous confidence he felt carried to a grander scene yet to come,
before an audience that would represent all Christendom, in whose
presence he should again be sealed as the messenger of the supreme
righteousness, and feel himself full charged with Divine strength.  It
was but a moment that expanded itself in that prevision.  While the
shout was still ringing in his ears he turned away within the church,
feeling the strain too great for him to tear it longer.

But when the Frate had disappeared, and the sunlight seemed no longer to
have anything special in its illumination, but was spreading itself
impartially over all things clean and unclean, there began, along with
the general movement of the crowd, a confusion of voices in which
certain strong discords and varying scales of laughter made it evident
that, in the previous silence and universal kneeling, hostility and
scorn had only submitted unwillingly to a momentary spell.

"It seems to me the plaudits are giving way to criticism," said Tito,
who had been watching the scene attentively from an upper loggia in one
of the houses opposite the church.  "Nevertheless it was a striking
moment, eh, Messer Pietro?  Fra Girolamo is a man to make one understand
that there was a time when the monk's frock was a symbol of power over
men's minds rather than over the keys of women's cupboards."

"Assuredly," said Pietro Cennini.  "And until I have seen proof that Fra
Girolamo has much less faith in God's judgments than the common run of
men, instead of having considerably more, I shall not believe that he
would brave Heaven in this way if his soul were laden with a conscious
lie."



CHAPTER SIXTY THREE.

RIPENING SCHEMES.

A month after that Carnival, one morning near the end of March, Tito
descended the marble steps of the Old Palace, bound on a pregnant errand
to San Marco.  For some reason, he did not choose to take the direct
road, which was but a slightly-bent line from the Old Palace; he chose
rather to make a circuit by the Piazza di Santa Croce, where the people
would be pouring out of the church after the early sermon.

It was in the grand church of Santa Croce that the daily Lenten sermon
had of late had the largest audience.  For Savonarola's voice had ceased
to be heard even in his own church of San Marco, a hostile Signoria
having imposed silence on him in obedience to a new letter from the
Pope, threatening the city with an immediate interdict if this "wretched
worm" and "monstrous idol" were not forbidden to preach, and sent to
demand pardon at Rome.  And next to hearing Fra Girolamo himself, the
most exciting Lenten occupation was to hear him argued against and
vilified.  This excitement was to be had in Santa Croce, where the
Franciscan appointed to preach the Quaresimal sermons had offered to
clench his arguments by walking through the fire with Fra Girolamo.  Had
not that schismatical Dominican said, that his prophetic doctrine would
be proved by a miracle at the fitting time?  Here, then, was the fitting
time.  Let Savonarola walk through the fire, and if he came out unhurt,
the Divine origin of his doctrine would be demonstrated; but if the fire
consumed him, his falsity would be manifest; and that he might have no
excuse for evading the test, the Franciscan declared himself willing to
be a victim to this high logic, and to be burned for the sake of
securing the necessary minor premiss.

Savonarola, according to his habit, had taken no notice of these pulpit
attacks.  But it happened that the zealous preacher of Santa Croce was
no other than the Fra Francesco di Puglia, who at Prato the year before
had been engaged in a like challenge with Savonarola's fervent follower
Fra Domenico, but had been called home by his superiors while the heat
was simply oratorical.  Honest Fra Domenico, then, who was preaching
Lenten sermons to the women in the Via del Cocomero, no sooner heard of
this new challenge, than he took up the gauntlet for his master, and
declared himself ready to walk through the fire with Fra Francesco.
Already the people were beginning to take a strong interest in what
seemed to them a short and easy method of argument (for those who were
to be convinced), when Savonarola, keenly alive to the dangers that lay
in the mere discussion of the case, commanded Fra Domenico to withdraw
his acceptance of the challenge and secede from the affair.  The
Franciscan declared himself content: he had not directed his challenge
to any subaltern, but to Fra Girolamo himself.

After that, the popular interest in the Lenten sermons had flagged a
little.  But this morning, when Tito entered the Piazza di Santa Croce,
he found, as he expected, that the people were pouring from the church
in large numbers.  Instead of dispersing, many of them concentrated
themselves towards a particular spot near the entrance of the Franciscan
monastery, and Tito took the same direction, threading the crowd with a
careless and leisurely air, but keeping careful watch on that monastic
entrance, as if he expected some object of interest to issue from it.

It was no such expectation that occupied the crowd.  The object they
were caring about was already visible to them in the shape of a large
placard, affixed by order of the Signoria, and covered with very legible
official handwriting.  But curiosity was somewhat balked by the fact
that the manuscript was chiefly in Latin, and though nearly every man
knew beforehand approximately what the placard contained, he had an
appetite for more exact knowledge, which gave him an irritating sense of
his neighbour's ignorance in not being able to interpret the learned
tongue.  For that aural acquaintance with Latin phrases which the
unlearned might pick up from pulpit quotations constantly interpreted by
the preacher could help them little when they saw written Latin; the
spelling even of the modern language being in an unorganised and
scrambling condition for the mass of people who could read and write,
[Note] while the majority of those assembled nearest to the placard were
not in the dangerous predicament of possessing that little knowledge.

"It's the Frate's doctrines that he's to prove by being burned," said
that large public character Goro, who happened to be among the foremost
gazers.  "The Signoria has taken it in hand, and the writing is to let
us know.  It's what the Padre has been telling us about in his sermon."

"Nay, Goro," said a sleek shopkeeper, compassionately, "thou hast got
thy legs into twisted hose there.  The Frate has to prove his doctrines
by _not_ being burned: he is to walk through the fire, and come out on
the other side sound and whole."

"Yes, yes," said a young sculptor, who wore his white-streaked cap and
tunic with a jaunty air.  "But Fra Girolamo objects to walking through
the fire.  Being sound and whole already, he sees no reason why he
should walk through the fire to come out in just the same condition.  He
leaves such odds and ends of work to Fra Domenico."

"Then I say he flinches like a coward," said Goro, in a wheezy treble.
"Suffocation! that was what he did at the Carnival.  He had us all in
the Piazza to see the lightning strike him, and nothing came of it."

"Stop that bleating," said a tall shoemaker, who had stepped in to hear
part of the sermon, with bunches of slippers hanging over his shoulders.
"It seems to me, friend, that you are about as wise as a calf with
water on its brain.  The Frate will flinch from nothing: he'll say
nothing beforehand, perhaps, but when the moment comes he'll walk
through the fire without asking any grey-frock to keep him company.  But
I would give a shoestring to know what this Latin all is."

"There's so much of it," said the shopkeeper, "else I'm pretty good at
guessing.  Is there no scholar to be seen?" he added, with a slight
expression of disgust.

There was a general turning of heads, which caused the talkers to descry
Tito approaching in their rear.

"Here is one," said the young sculptor, smiling and raising his cap.

"It is the secretary of the Ten: he is going to the convent, doubtless;
make way for him," said the shopkeeper, also doffing, though that mark
of respect was rarely shown by Florentines except to the highest
officials.  The exceptional reverence was really exacted by the
splendour and grace of Tito's appearance, which made his black mantle,
with its gold fibula, look like a regal robe, and his ordinary black
velvet cap like an entirely exceptional head-dress.  The hardening of
his cheeks and mouth, which was the chief change in his face since he
came to Florence, seemed to a superficial glance only to give his beauty
a more masculine character.  He raised his own cap immediately and
said--

"Thanks, my friend, I merely wished, as you did, to see what is at the
foot of this placard--ah, it is as I expected.  I had been informed that
the government permits any one who will, to subscribe his name as a
candidate to enter the fire--which is an act of liberality worthy of the
magnificent Signoria--reserving of course the right to make a selection.
And doubtless many believers will be eager to subscribe their names.
For what is it to enter the fire, to one whose faith is firm?  A man is
afraid of the fire, because he believes it will burn him; but if he
believes the contrary?"--here Tito lifted his shoulders and made an
oratorical pause--"for which reason I have never been one to disbelieve
the Frate, when he has said that he would enter the fire to prove his
doctrine.  For in his place, if you believed the fire would not burn
you, which of you, my friends, would not enter it as readily as you
would walk along the dry bed of the Mugnone?"

As Tito looked round him during this appeal, there was a change in some
of his audience very much like the change in an eager dog when he is
invited to smell something pungent.  Since the question of burning was
becoming practical, it was not every one who would rashly commit himself
to any general view of the relation between faith and fire.  The scene
might have been too much for a gravity less under command than Tito's.

"Then, Messer Segretario," said the young sculptor, "it seems to me Fra
Francesco is the greater hero, for he offers to enter the fire for the
truth, though he is sure the fire will burn him."

"I do not deny it," said Tito, blandly.  "But if it turns out that Fra
Francesco is mistaken, he will have been burned for the wrong side, and
the Church has never reckoned such victims to be martyrs.  We must
suspend our judgment until the trial has really taken place."

"It is true, Messer Segretario," said the shopkeeper, with subdued
impatience.  "But will you favour us by interpreting the Latin?"

"Assuredly," said Tito.  "It does but express the conclusions or
doctrines which the Frate specially teaches, and which the trial by fire
is to prove true or false.  They are doubtless familiar to you.  First,
that Florence--"

"Let us have the Latin bit by bit, and then tell us what it means," said
the shoemaker, who had been a frequent hearer of Fra Girolamo.

"Willingly," said Tito, smiling.  "You will then judge if I give you the
right meaning."

"Yes, yes; that's fair," said Goro.

"_Ecclesia Dei indiget renovatione_; that is, the Church of God needs
purifying or regenerating."

"It is true," said several voices at once.

"That means, the priests ought to lead better lives; there needs no
miracle to prove that.  That's what the Frate has always been saying,"
said the shoemaker.

"_Flagellabitur_," Tito went on.  "That is, it will be scourged.
_Renovabitur_: it will be purified.  _Florentia quoque post flagellam
renovabitur et prosperabitur_: Florence also, after the scourging, shall
be purified and shall prosper."

"That means we are to get Pisa again," said the shopkeeper.

"And get the wool from England as we used to do, I should hope," said an
elderly man, in an old-fashioned berretta, who had been silent till now.
"There's been scourging enough with the sinking of the trade."

At this moment, a tall personage, surmounted by a red feather, issued
from the door of the convent, and exchanged an indifferent glance with
Tito; who, tossing his becchetto carelessly over his left shoulder,
turned to his reading again, while the bystanders, with more timidity
than respect, shrank to make a passage for Messer Dolfo Spini.

"_Infideles convertentur ad Christum_," Tito went on.  "That is, the
infidels shall be converted to Christ."

"Those are the Turks and the Moors.  Well, I've nothing to say against
that," said the shopkeeper, dispassionately.

"_Haec autem omnia erunt temporibus nostris_: and all these things shall
happen in our times."

"Why, what use would they be else?" said Goro.

"_Excommunicato nuper lata contra Reverendum Patrem nostrum Fratrem
Hieronymum nulla est_: the excommunication lately pronounced against our
reverend father, Fra Girolamo, is null.  _Non observantes eam non
peccant_: those who disregard it are not committing a sin."

"I shall know better what to say to that when we have had the Trial by
Fire," said the shopkeeper.

"Which doubtless will clear up everything," said Tito.  "That is all the
Latin--all the conclusions that are to be proved true or false by the
trial.  The rest you can perceive is simply a proclamation of the
Signoria in good Tuscan, calling on such as are eager to walk through
the fire, to come to the Palazzo and subscribe their names.  Can I serve
you further?  If not--"

Tito, as he turned away, raised his cap and bent slightly, with so easy
an air that the movement seemed a natural prompting of deference.

He quickened his pace as he left the Piazza, and after two or three
turnings he paused in a quiet street before a door at which he gave a
light and peculiar knock.  It was opened by a young woman whom he
chucked under the chin as he asked her if the Padrone was within, and he
then passed, without further ceremony, through another door which stood
ajar on his right-hand.  It admitted him into a handsome but untidy
room, where Dolfo Spini sat playing with a fine stag-hound which
alternately snuffed at a basket of pups and licked his hands with that,
affectionate disregard of her master's morals sometimes held to be one
of the most agreeable attributes of her sex.  He just looked up as Tito
entered, but continued his play, simply from that disposition to
persistence in some irrelevant action, by which slow-witted sensual
people seem to be continually counteracting their own purposes.  Tito
was patient.

"A handsome _bracca_ that," he said, quietly, standing with his thumbs
in his belt.  Presently he added, in that cool liquid tone which seemed
mild, but compelled attention, "When you have finished such caresses as
cannot possibly be deferred, my Dolfo, we will talk of business, if you
please.  My time, which I could wish to be eternity at your service, is
not entirely my own this morning."

"Down, Mischief, down!" said Spini, with sudden roughness.
"Malediction!" he added, still more gruffly, pushing the dog aside;
then, starting from his seat, he stood close to Tito, and put a hand on
his shoulder as he spoke.

"I hope your sharp wits see all the ins and outs of this business, my
fine necromancer, for it seems to me no clearer than the bottom of a
sack."

"What is your difficulty, my cavalier?"

"These accursed Frati Minori at Santa Croce.  They are drawing back now.
Fra Francesco himself seems afraid of sticking to his challenge; talks
of the Prophet being likely to use magic to get up a false miracle--
thinks he himself might be dragged into the fire and burned, and the
Prophet might come out whole by magic, and the Church be none the
better.  And then, after all our talking, there's not so much as a
blessed lay brother who will offer himself to pair with that pious sheep
Fra Domenico."

"It is the peculiar stupidity of the tonsured skull that prevents them
from seeing of how little consequence it is whether they are burned or
not," said Tito.  "Have you sworn well to them that they shall be in no
danger of entering the fire?"

"No," said Spini, looking puzzled; "because one of them will be obliged
to go in with Fra Domenico, who thinks it a thousand years till the
fagots are ready."

"Not at all.  Fra Domenico himself is not likely to go in.  I have told
you before, my Dolfo, only your powerful mind is not to be impressed
without more repetition than suffices for the vulgar--I have told you
that now you have got the Signoria to take up this affair and prevent it
from being hushed up by Fra Girolamo, nothing is necessary but that on a
given day the fuel should be prepared in the Piazza, and the people got
together with the expectation of seeing something prodigious.  If, after
that, the Prophet quits the Piazza without any appearance of a miracle
on his side, he is ruined with the people: they will be ready to pelt
him out of the city, the Signoria will find it easy to banish him from
the territory, and his Holiness may do as he likes with him.  Therefore,
my Alcibiades, swear to the Franciscans that their grey-frocks shall not
come within singeing distance of the fire."

Spini rubbed the back of his head with one hand, and tapped his sword
against his leg with the other, to stimulate his power of seeing these
intangible combinations.

"But," he said presently, looking up again, "unless we fall on him in
the Piazza, when the people are in a rage, and make an end of him and
his lies then and there, Valori and the Salviati and the Albizzi will
take up arms and raise a fight for him.  I know that was talked of when
there was the hubbub on Ascension Sunday.  And the people may turn round
again: there may be a story raised of the French king coming again, or
some other cursed chance in the hypocrite's favour.  The city will never
be safe till he's out of it."

"He _will_ be out of it before long, without your giving yourself any
further trouble than this little comedy of the Trial by Fire.  The wine
and the sun will make vinegar without any shouting to help them, as your
Florentine sages would say.  You will have the satisfaction of
delivering your city from an incubus by an able stratagem, instead of
risking blunders with sword-thrusts."

"But suppose he _did_ get magic and the devil to help him, and walk
through the fire after all?" said Spini, with a grimace intended to hide
a certain shyness in trenching on this speculative ground.  "How do you
know there's nothing in those things?  Plenty of scholars believe in
them, and this Frate is bad enough for anything."

"Oh, of course there are such things," said Tito, with a shrug: "but I
have particular reasons for knowing that the Frate is not on such terms
with the devil as can give him any confidence in this affair.  The only
magic he relies on is his own ability."

"Ability!" said Spini.  "Do you call it ability to be setting Florence
at loggerheads with the Pope and all the powers of Italy--all to keep
beckoning at the French king who never comes?  You may call him able,
but I call him a hypocrite, who wants to be master of everybody, and get
himself made Pope."

"You judge with your usual penetration, my captain, but our opinions do
not clash.  The Frate, wanting to be master, and to carry out his
projects against the Pope, requires the lever of a foreign power, and
requires Florence as a fulcrum.  I used to think him a narrow-minded
bigot, but now, I think him a shrewd ambitious man who knows what he is
aiming at, and directs his aim as skilfully as you direct a ball when
you are playing at _maglio_."

"Yes, yes," said Spini, cordially, "I can aim a ball."

"It is true," said Tito, with bland gravity; "and I should not have
troubled you with my trivial remark on the Frate's ability, but that you
may see how this will heighten the credit of your success against him at
Rome and at Milan, which is sure to serve you in good stead when the
city comes to change its policy."

"Well, thou art a good little demon, and shalt have good pay," said
Spini, patronisingly; whereupon he thought it only natural that the
useful Greek adventurer should smile with gratification as he said--

"Of course, any advantage to me depends entirely on your--"

"We shall have our supper at my palace to-night," interrupted Spini,
with a significant nod and an affectionate pat on Tito's shoulder, "and
I shall expound the new scheme to them all."

"Pardon, my magnificent patron," said Tito; "the scheme has been the
same from the first--it has never varied except in your memory.  Are you
sure you have fast hold of it now?"

Spini rehearsed.

"One thing more," he said, as Tito was hastening away.  "There is that
sharp-nosed notary, Ser Ceccone; he has been handy of late.  Tell me,
you who can see a man wink when you're behind him, do you think I may go
on making use of him?"

Tito dared not say "No."  He knew his companion too well to trust him
with advice when all Spini's vanity and self-interest were not engaged
in concealing the adviser.

"Doubtless," he answered, promptly.  "I have nothing to say against
Ceccone."

That suggestion of the notary's intimate access to Spini caused Tito a
passing twinge, interrupting his amused satisfaction in the success with
which he made a tool of the man who fancied himself a patron.  For he
had been rather afraid of Ser Ceccone.  Tito's nature made him
peculiarly alive to circumstances that might be turned to his
disadvantage; his memory was much haunted by such possibilities,
stimulating him to contrivances by which he might ward them off.  And it
was not likely that he should forget that October morning more than a
year ago, when Romola had appeared suddenly before him at the door of
Nello's shop, and had compelled him to declare his certainty that Fra
Girolamo was not going outside the gates.  The fact that Ser Ceccone had
been a witness of that scene, together with Tito's perception that for
some reason or other he was an object of dislike to the notary, had
received a new importance from the recent turn of events.  For after
having been implicated in the Medicean plots, and having found it
advisable in consequence to retire into the country for some time, Ser
Ceccone had of late, since his reappearance in the city, attached
himself to the Arrabbiati, and cultivated the patronage of Dolfo Spini.
Now that captain of the Compagnacci was much given, when in the company
of intimates, to confidential narrative about his own doings, and if Ser
Ceccone's powers of combination were sharpened by enmity, he might
gather some knowledge which he could use against Tito with very
unpleasant results.

It would be pitiable to be balked in well-conducted schemes by an
insignificant notary; to be lamed by the sting of an insect whom he had
offended unawares.  "But," Tito said to himself, "the man's dislike to
me can be nothing deeper than the ill-humour of a dinnerless dog; I
shall conquer it if I can make him prosperous."  And he had been very
glad of an opportunity which had presented itself of providing the
notary with a temporary post as an extra _cancelliere_ or registering
secretary under the Ten, believing that with this sop and the
expectation of more, the waspish cur must be quite cured of the
disposition to bite him.

But perfect scheming demands omniscience, and the notary's envy had been
stimulated into hatred by causes of which Tito knew nothing.  That
evening when Tito, returning from his critical audience with the Special
Council, had brushed by Ser Ceccone on the stairs, the notary, who had
only just returned from Pistoja, and learned the arrest of the
conspirators, was bound on an errand which bore a humble resemblance to
Tito's.  He also, without giving up a show of popular zeal, had been
putting in the Medicean lottery.  He also had been privy to the
unexecuted plot, and was willing to tell what he knew, but knew much
less to tell.  He also would have been willing to go on treacherous
errands, but a more eligible agent had forestalled him.  His
propositions were received coldly; the council, he was told, was already
in possession of the needed information, and since he had been thus busy
in sedition, it would be well for him to retire out of the way of
mischief, otherwise the government might be obliged to take note of him.
Ser Ceccone wanted no evidence to make him attribute his failure to
Tito, and his spite was the more bitter because the nature of the case
compelled him to hold his peace about it.  Nor was this the whole of his
grudge against the flourishing Melema.  On issuing from his
hiding-place, and attaching himself to the Arrabbiati, he had earned
some pay as one of the spies who reported information on Florentine
affairs to the Milanese court; but his pay had been small,
notwithstanding his pains to write full letters, and he had lately been
apprised that his news was seldom more than a late and imperfect edition
of what was known already.  Now Ser Ceccone had no positive knowledge
that Tito had an underhand connection with the Arrabbiati and the Court
of Milan, but he had a suspicion of which he chewed the cud with as
strong a sense of flavour as if it had been a certainty.

This fine-grown vigorous hatred could swallow the feeble opiate of
Tito's favours, and be as lively as ever after it.  Why should Ser
Ceccone like Melema any the better for doing him favours?  Doubtless the
suave secretary had his own ends to serve; and what right had he to the
superior position which made it possible for him to show favour?  But
since he had tuned his voice to flattery, Ser Ceccone would pitch his in
the same key, and it remained to be seen who would win at the game of
outwitting.

To have a mind well oiled with that sort of argument which prevents any
claim from grasping it, seems eminently, convenient sometimes; only the
oil becomes objectionable when we find it anointing other minds on which
we want to establish a hold.

Tito, however, not being quite omniscient, felt now no more than a
passing twinge of uneasiness at the suggestion of Ser Ceccone's power to
hurt him.  It was only for a little while that he cared greatly about
keeping clear of suspicions and hostility.  He was now playing his final
game in Florence, and the skill he was conscious of applying gave him a
pleasure in it even apart from the expected winnings.  The errand on
which he was sent to San Marco was a stroke in which he felt so much
confidence that he had already given notice to the Ten of his desire to
resign his office at an indefinite period within the next month or two,
and had obtained permission to make that resignation suddenly, if his
affairs needed it, with the understanding that Niccolo Macchiavelli was
to be his provisional substitute, if not his successor.  He was acting
on hypothetic grounds, but this was the sort of action that had the
keenest interest for his diplomatic mind.  From a combination of general
knowledge concerning Savonarola's purposes with diligently observed
details he had framed a conjecture which he was about to verify by this
visit to San Marco.  If he proved to be right, his game would be won,
and he might soon turn his back on Florence.  He looked eagerly towards
that consummation, for many circumstances besides his own weariness of
the place told him that it was time for him to be gone.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Note.  The old diarists throw in their consonants with a regard rather
to quantity than position, well typified by the _Ragnolo Braghiello_
(Agnolo Gabriello) of Boccaccio's Ferondo.



CHAPTER SIXTY FOUR.

THE PROPHET IN HIS CELL.

Tito's visit to San Marco had been announced beforehand, and he was at
once conducted by Fra Niccolo, Savonarola's secretary, up the spiral
staircase into the long corridors lined with cells--corridors where Fra
Angelico's frescoes, delicate as the rainbow on the melting cloud,
startled the unaccustomed eye here and there, as if they had been sudden
reflections cast from an ethereal world, where the Madonna sat crowned
in her radiant glory, and the Divine infant looked forth with perpetual
promise.

It was an hour of relaxation in the monastery, and most of the cells
were empty.  The light through the narrow windows looked in on nothing
but bare walls, and the hard pallet and the crucifix.  And even behind
that door at the end of a long corridor, in the inner cell opening from
an antechamber where the Prior usually sat at his desk or received
private visitors, the high jet of light fell on only one more object
that looked quite as common a monastic sight as the bare walls and hard
pallet.  It was but the back of a figure in the long white Dominican
tunic and scapulary, kneeling with bowed head before a crucifix.  It
might have been any ordinary Fra Girolamo, who had nothing worse to
confess than thinking of wrong things when he was singing _in coro_, or
feeling a spiteful joy when Fra Benedetto dropped the ink over his own
miniatures in the breviary he was illuminating--who had no higher
thought than that of climbing safely into Paradise up the narrow ladder
of prayer, fasting, and obedience.  But under this particular white
tunic there was a heart beating with a consciousness inconceivable to
the average monk, and perhaps hard to be conceived by any man who has
not arrived at self-knowledge through a tumultuous inner life: a
consciousness in which irrevocable errors and lapses from veracity were
so entwined with noble purposes and sincere beliefs, in which
self-justifying expediency was so inwoven with the tissue of a great
work which the whole being seemed as unable to abandon as the body was
unable to abandon glowing and trembling before the objects of hope and
fear, that it was perhaps impossible, whatever course might be adopted,
for the conscience to find perfect repose.

Savonarola was not only in the attitude of prayer, there were Latin
words of prayer on his lips; and yet he was not praying.  He had entered
his cell, had fallen on his knees, and burst into words of supplication,
seeking in this way for an influx of calmness which would be a warrant
to him that the resolutions urged on him by crowding thoughts and
passions were not wresting him away from the Divine support; but the
previsions and impulses which had been at work within him for the last
hour were too imperious; and while he pressed his hands against his
face, and while his lips were uttering audibly.  "_Cor mundum crea in
me_" his mind was still filled with the images of the snare his enemies
had prepared for him, was still busy with the arguments by which he
could justify himself against their taunts and accusations.

And it was not only against his opponents that Savonarola had to defend
himself.  This morning he had had new proof that his friends and
followers were as much inclined to urge on the Trial by Fire as his
enemies: desiring and tacitly expecting that he himself would at last
accept the challenge and evoke the long-expected miracle which was to
dissipate doubt and triumph over malignity.  Had he not said that God
would declare himself at the fitting time?  And to the understanding of
plain Florentines, eager to get party questions settled, it seemed that
no time could be more fitting than this.  Certainly, if Fra Domenico
walked through the fire unhurt, _that_ would be a miracle, and the faith
and ardour of that good brother were felt to be a cheering augury; but
Savonarola was acutely conscious that the secret longing of his
followers to see him accept the challenge had not been dissipated by any
reasons he had given for his refusal.

Yet it was impossible to him to satisfy them; and with bitter distress
he saw now that it was impossible for him any longer to resist the
prosecution of the trial in Fra Domenico's case.  Not that Savonarola
had uttered and written a falsity when he declared his belief in a
future supernatural attestation of his work; but his mind was so
constituted that while it was easy for him to believe in a miracle
which, being distant and undefined, was screened behind the strong
reasons he saw for its occurrence, and yet easier for him to have a
belief in inward miracles such as his own prophetic inspiration and
divinely-wrought intuitions; it was at the same time insurmountably
difficult to him to believe in the probability of a miracle which, like
this of being carried unhurt through the fire, pressed in all its
details on his imagination and involved a demand not only for belief but
for exceptional action.

Savonarola's nature was one of those in which opposing tendencies
co-exist in almost equal strength: the passionate sensibility which,
impatient of definite thought, floods every idea with emotion and tends
towards contemplative ecstasy, alternated in him with a keen perception
of outward facts and a vigorous practical judgment of men and things.
And in this case of the Trial by Fire, the latter characteristics were
stimulated into unusual activity by an acute physical sensitiveness
which gives overpowering force to the conception of pain and destruction
as a necessary sequence of facts which have already been causes of pain
in our experience.  The promptitude with which men will consent to touch
red-hot iron with a wet finger is not to be measured by their theoretic
acceptance of the impossibility that the iron will burn them: practical
belief depends on what is most strongly represented in the mind at a
given moment.  And with the Frate's constitution, when the Trial by Fire
was urged on his imagination as an immediate demand, it was impossible
for him to believe that he or any other man could walk through the
flames unhurt--impossible for him to believe that even if he resolved to
offer himself, he would not shrink at the last moment.

But the Florentines were not likely to make these fine distinctions.  To
the common run of mankind it has always seemed a proof of mental vigour
to find moral questions easy, and judge conduct according to concise
alternatives.  And nothing was likely to seem plainer than that a man
who at one time declared that God would not leave him without the
guarantee of a miracle, and yet drew back when it was proposed to test
his declaration, had said what he did not believe.  Were not Fra
Domenico and Fra Mariano, and scores of Piagnoni besides, ready to enter
the fire?  What was the cause of their superior courage, if it was not
their superior faith?  Savonarola could not have explained his conduct
satisfactorily to his friends, even if he had been able to explain it
thoroughly to himself.  And he was not.  Our naked feelings make haste
to clothe themselves in propositions which lie at hand among our store
of opinions, and to give a true account of what passes within us
something else is necessary besides sincerity, even when sincerity is
unmixed.  In these very moments, when Savonarola was kneeling in audible
prayer, he had ceased to hear the words on his lips.  They were drowned
by argumentative voices within him that shaped their reasons more and
more for an outward audience.

"To appeal to heaven for a miracle by a rash acceptance of a challenge,
which is a mere snare prepared for me by ignoble foes, would be a
tempting of God, and the appeal would not be responded to.  Let the
Pope's legate come, let the ambassadors of all the great Powers come and
promise that the calling of a General Council and the reform of the
Church shall hang on the miracle, and I will enter the flames, trusting
that God will not withhold His seal from that great work.  Until then I
reserve myself for higher duties which are directly laid upon me: it is
not permitted to me to leap from the chariot for the sake of wrestling
with every loud vaunter.  But Fra Domenico's invincible, zeal to enter
into the trial may be the sign of a Divine vocation, may be a pledge
that the miracle--"

But no! when Savonarola brought his mind close to the threatened scene
in the Piazza, and imagined a human body entering the fire, his belief
recoiled again.  It was not an event that his imagination could simply
see: he felt it with shuddering vibrations to the extremities of his
sensitive fingers.  The miracle could not be.  Nay, the trial itself was
not to happen: he was warranted in doing all in his power to hinder it.
The fuel might be got ready in the Piazza, the people might be
assembled, the preparatory formalities might be gone through: all this
was perhaps inevitable now, and he could no longer resist it without
bringing dishonour on himself?  Yes, and therefore on the cause of God.
But it was not really intended that the Franciscan should enter the
fire, and while _he_ hung back there would be the means of preventing
Fra Domenico's entrance.  At the very worst, if Fra Domenico were
compelled to enter, he should carry the consecrated Host with him, and
with that Mystery in his hand, there might be a warrant for expecting
that the ordinary effects of fire would be stayed; or, more probably,
this demand would be resisted, and might thus be a final obstacle to the
trial.

But these intentions could not be avowed: he must appear frankly to
await the trial, and to trust in its issue.  That dissidence between
inward reality and outward seeming was not the Christian simplicity
after which he had striven through years of his youth and prime, and
which he had preached as a chief fruit of the Divine life.  In the
stress and heat of the day, with cheeks burning, with shouts ringing in
the ears, who is so blest as to remember the yearnings he had in the
cool and silent morning and know that he has not belied them?

"O God, it is for the sake of the people--because they are blind--
because their faith depends on me.  If I put on sackcloth and cast
myself among the ashes, who will take up the standard and head the
battle?  Have I not been led by a way which I knew not to the work that
lies before me?"

The conflict was one that could not end, and in the effort at prayerful
pleading the uneasy mind laved its smart continually in thoughts of the
greatness of that task which there was no man else to fulfil if he
forsook it.  It was not a thing of everyday that a man should be
inspired with the vision and the daring that made a sacred rebel.

Even the words of prayer had died away.  He continued, to kneel, but his
mind was filled with the images of results to be felt through all
Europe; and the sense of immediate difficulties was being lost in the
glow of that vision, when the knocking at the door announced the
expected visit.

Savonarola drew on his mantle before he left his cell, as was his custom
when he received visitors; and with that immediate response to any
appeal from without which belongs to a power-loving nature accustomed to
make its power felt by speech, he met Tito with a glance as
self-possessed and strong as if he had risen from resolution instead of
conflict.

Tito did not kneel, but simply made a greeting of profound deference,
which Savonarola received quietly without any sacerdotal words, and then
desiring him to be seated, said at once--

"Your business is something of weight, my son, that could not be
conveyed through others?"

"Assuredly, father, else I should not have presumed to ask it.  I will
not trespass on your time by any proem.  I gathered from a remark of
Messer Domenico Mazzinghi that you might be glad to make use of the next
special courier who is sent to France with despatches from the Ten.  I
must entreat you to pardon me if I have been too officious; but inasmuch
as Messer Domenico is at this moment away at his villa, I wished to
apprise you that a courier carrying important letters is about to depart
for Lyons at daybreak to-morrow."

The muscles of Fra Girolamo's face were eminently under command, as must
be the case with all men whose personality is powerful, and in
deliberate speech he was habitually cautious, confiding his intentions
to none without necessity.  But under any strong mental stimulus, his
eyes were liable to a dilatation and added brilliancy that no strength
of will could control.  He looked steadily at Tito, and did not answer
immediately, as if he had to consider whether the information he had
just heard met any purpose of his.

Tito, whose glance never seemed observant, but rarely let anything
escape it, had expected precisely that dilatation and flash of
Savonarola's eyes which he had noted on other occasions.  He saw it, and
then immediately busied himself in adjusting his gold fibula, which had
got wrong; seeming to imply that he awaited an answer patiently.

The fact was that Savonarola had expected to receive this intimation
from Domenico Mazzinghi, one of the Ten, an ardent disciple of his whom
he had already employed to write a private letter to the Florentine
ambassador in France, to prepare the way for a letter to the French king
himself in Savonarola's handwriting, which now lay ready in the desk at
his side.  It was a letter calling on the king to assist in summoning a
General Council, that might reform the abuses of the Church, and begin
by deposing Pope Alexander, who was not rightfully Pope, being a vicious
unbeliever, elected by corruption and governing by simony.

This fact was not what Tito knew, but what his constructive talent,
guided by subtle indications, had led him to guess and hope.

"It is true, my son," said Savonarola, quietly,--"it is true I have
letters which I would gladly send by safe conveyance under cover to our
ambassador.  Our community of San Marco, as you know, has affairs in
France, being, amongst other things, responsible for a debt to that
singularly wise and experienced Frenchman, Signor Philippe de Comines,
on the library of the Medici, which we purchased; but I apprehend that
Domenico Mazzinghi himself may return to the city before evening, and I
should gain more time for preparation of the letters if I waited to
deposit them in his hands."

"Assuredly, reverend father, that might be better on all grounds, except
one, namely, that if anything occurred to hinder Messer Domenico's
return, the despatch of the letters would require either that I should
come to San Marco again at a late hour, or that you should send them to
me by your secretary; and I am aware that you wish to guard against the
false inferences which might be drawn from a too frequent communication
between yourself and any officer of the government."  In throwing out
this difficulty Tito felt that the more unwillingness the Frate showed
to trust him, the more certain he would be of his conjecture.

Savonarola was silent; but while he kept his mouth firm, a slight glow
rose in his face with the suppressed excitement that was growing within
him.  It would be a critical moment--that in which he delivered the
letter out of his own hands.

"It is most probable that Messer Domenico will return in time," said
Tito, affecting to consider the Frate's determination settled, and
rising from his chair as he spoke.  "With your permission, I will take
my leave, father, not to trespass on your time when my errand is done;
but as I may not be favoured with another interview, I venture to
confide to you--what is not yet known to others, except to the
magnificent Ten--that I contemplate resigning my secretaryship, and
leaving Florence shortly.  Am I presuming too much on your interest in
stating what relates chiefly to myself?"

"Speak on, my son," said the Frate; "I desire to know your prospects."

"I find, then, that I have mistaken my real vocation in forsaking the
career of pure letters, for which I was brought up.  The politics of
Florence, father, are worthy to occupy the greatest mind--to occupy
yours--when a man is in a position to execute his own ideas; but when,
like me, he can only hope to be the mere instrument of changing schemes,
he requires to be animated by the minor attachments of a born
Florentine: also, my wife's unhappy alienation from a Florentine
residence since the painful events of August naturally influences me.  I
wish to join her."

Savonarola inclined his head approvingly.

"I intend, then, soon to leave Florence, to visit the chief courts of
Europe, and to widen my acquaintance with the men of letters in the
various universities.  I shall go first to the court of Hungary, where
scholars are eminently welcome; and I shall probably start in a week or
ten days.  I have not concealed from you, father, that I am no religious
enthusiast; I have not my wife's ardour; but religious enthusiasm, as I
conceive, is not necessary in order to appreciate the grandeur and
justice of your views concerning the government of nations and the
Church.  And if you condescend to intrust me with any commission that
will further the relations you wish to establish, I shall feel honoured.
May I now take my leave?"

"Stay, my son.  When you depart from Florence I will send a letter to
your wife, of whose spiritual welfare I would fain be assured, for she
left me in anger.  As for the letters to France, such as I have ready--"

Savonarola rose and turned to his desk as he spoke.  He took from it a
letter on which Tito could see, but not read, an address in the Frate's
own minute and exquisite handwriting, still to be seen covering the
margins of his Bibles.  He took a large sheet of paper, enclosed the
letter, and sealed it.

"Pardon me, father," said Tito, before Savonarola had time to speak,
"unless it were your decided wish, I would rather not incur the
responsibility of carrying away the letter.  Messer Domenico Mazzinghi
will doubtless return, or, if not, Fra Niccolo can convey it to me at
the second hour of the evening, when I shall place the other despatches
in the courier's hands."

"At present, my son," said the Frate, waiving that point, "I wish you to
address this packet to our ambassador in your own handwriting, which is
preferable to my secretary's."

Tito sat down to write the address while the Frate stood by him with
folded arms, the glow mounting in his cheek, and his lip at last
quivering.  Tito rose and was about to move away, when Savonarola said
abruptly--"Take it, my son.  There is no use in waiting.  It does not
please me that Fra Niccolo should have needless errands to the Palazzo."

As Tito took the letter, Savonarola stood in suppressed excitement that
forbade further speech.  There seems to be a subtle emanation from
passionate natures like his, making their mental states tell immediately
on others; when they are absent-minded and inwardly excited there is
silence in the air.

Tito made a deep reverence and went out with the letter under his
mantle.

The letter was duly delivered to the courier and carried out of
Florence.  But before that happened another messenger, privately
employed by Tito, had conveyed information in cipher, which was carried
by a series of relays to armed agents of Ludovico Sforza, Duke of Milan,
on the watch for the very purpose of intercepting despatches on the
borders of the Milanese territory.



CHAPTER SIXTY FIVE.

THE TRIAL BY FIRE.

Little more than a week after, on the seventh of April, the great Piazza
della Signoria presented a stranger spectacle even than the famous
Bonfire of Vanities.  And a greater multitude had assembled to see it
than had ever before tried to find place for themselves in the wide
Piazza, even on the day of San Giovanni.

It was near mid-day, and since the early morning there had been a
gradual swarming of the people at every coign of vantage or disadvantage
offered by the facades and roofs of the houses, and such spaces of the
pavement as were free to the public.  Men were seated on iron rods that
made a sharp angle with the rising wall, were clutching slim pillars
with arms and legs, were astride on the necks of the rough statuary that
here and there surmounted the entrances of the grander houses, were
finding a palm's-breadth of seat on a bit of architrave, and a footing
on the rough projections of the rustic stonework, while they clutched
the strong iron rings or staples driven into the walls beside them.

For they were come to see a Miracle: cramped limbs and abraded flesh
seemed slight inconveniences with that prospect close at hand.  It is
the ordinary lot of mankind to hear of miracles, and more or less to
believe in them; but now the Florentines were going to see one.  At the
very least they would see half a miracle; for if the monk did not come
whole out of the fire, they would see him enter it, and infer that he
was burned in the middle.

There could be no reasonable doubt, it seemed, that the fire would be
kindled, and that the monks would enter it.  For there, before their
eyes, was the long platform, eight feet broad, and twenty yards long,
with a grove of fuel heaped up terribly, great branches of dry oak as a
foundation, crackling thorns above, and well-anointed tow and rags,
known to make fine flames in Florentine illuminations.  The platform
began at the corner of the marble terrace in front of the Old Palace,
close to Marzocco, the stone lion, whose aged visage looked frowningly
along the grove of fuel that stretched obliquely across the Piazza.

Besides that, there were three large bodies of armed men: five hundred
hired soldiers of the Signoria stationed before the palace; five hundred
Compagnacci under Dolfo Spini, far-off on the opposite side of the
Piazza; and three hundred armed citizens of another sort, under Marco
Salviati, Savonarola's friend, in front of Orgagna's Loggia, where the
Franciscans and Dominicans were to be placed with their champions.

Here had been much expense of money and labour, and high dignities were
concerned.  There could be no reasonable doubt that something great was
about to happen; and it would certainly be a great thing if the two
monks were simply burned, for in that case too God would have spoken,
and said very plainly that Fra Girolamo was not His prophet.

And there was not much longer to wait, for it was now near mid-day.
Half the monks were already at their post, and that half of the Loggia
that lies towards the Palace was already filled with grey mantles; but
the other half, divided off by boards, was still empty of everything
except a small altar.  The Franciscans had entered and taken their
places in silence.  But now, at the other side of the Piazza was heard
loud chanting from two hundred voices, and there was general
satisfaction, if not in the chanting, at least in the evidence that the
Dominicans were come.  That loud chanting repetition of the prayer, "Let
God arise, and let His enemies be scattered," was unpleasantly
suggestive to some impartial ears of a desire to vaunt confidence and
excite dismay; and so was the flame-coloured velvet cope in which Fra
Domenico was arrayed as he headed the procession, cross in hand, his
simple mind really exalted with faith, and with the genuine intention to
enter the flames for the glory of God and Fra Girolamo.  Behind him came
Savonarola in the white vestment of a priest, carrying in his hands a
vessel containing the consecrated Host.  He, too, was chanting loudly;
he, too, looked firm and confident, and as all eyes were turned eagerly
on him, either in anxiety, curiosity, or malignity, from the moment when
he entered the Piazza till he mounted the steps of the Loggia and
deposited the Sacrament on the altar, there was an intensifying flash
and energy in his countenance responding to that scrutiny.

We are so made, almost all of us, that the false seeming which we have
thought of with painful shrinking when beforehand in our solitude it has
urged itself on us as a necessity, will possess our muscles and move our
lips as if nothing but that were easy when once we have come under the
stimulus of expectant eyes and ears.  And the strength of that stimulus
to Savonarola can hardly be measured by the experience of ordinary
lives.  Perhaps no man has ever had a mighty influence over his fellows
without having the innate need to dominate, and this need usually
becomes the more imperious in proportion as the complications of life
make Self inseparable from a purpose which is not selfish.  In this way
it came to pass that on the day of the Trial by Fire, the doubleness
which is the pressing temptation in every public career, whether of
priest, orator, or statesman, was more strongly defined in Savonarola's
consciousness as the acting of a part, than at any other period in his
life.  He was struggling not against impending martyrdom, but against
impending ruin.

Therefore he looked and acted as if he were thoroughly confident, when
all the while foreboding was pressing with leaden weight on his heart,
not only because of the probable issues of this trial, but because of
another event already past--an event which was spreading a sunny
satisfaction through the mind of a man who was looking down at the
passion-worn prophet from a window of the Old Palace.  It was a common
turning-point towards which those widely-sundered lives had been
converging, that two evenings ago the news had come that the Florentine
courier of the Ten had been arrested and robbed of all his despatches,
so that Savonarola's letter was already in the hands of the Duke of
Milan, and would soon be in the hands of the Pope, not only heightening
rage, but giving a new justification to extreme measures.  There was no
malignity in Tito Melema's satisfaction: it was the mild
self-gratulation of a man who has won a game that has employed
hypothetic skill, not a game that has stirred the muscles and heated the
blood.  Of course that bundle of desires and contrivances called human
nature, when moulded into the form of a plain-featured Frate
Predicatore, more or less of an impostor, could not be a pathetic object
to a brilliant-minded scholar who understood everything.  Yet this
tonsured Girolamo with the high nose and large under lip was an
immensely clever Frate, mixing with his absurd superstitions or
fabrications very remarkable notions about government: no babbler, but a
man who could keep his secrets.  Tito had no more spite against him than
against Saint Dominic.  On the contrary, Fra Girolamo's existence had
been highly convenient to Tito Melema, furnishing him with that round of
the ladder from which he was about to leap on to a new and smooth
footing very much to his heart's content.  And everything now was in
forward preparation for that leap: let one more sun rise and set, and
Tito hoped to quit Florence.  He had been so industrious that he felt at
full leisure to amuse himself with to-day's comedy, which the
thick-headed Dolfo Spini could never have brought about but for him.

Not yet did the loud chanting cease, but rather swelled to a deafening
roar, being taken up in all parts of the Piazza by the Piagnoni, who
carried their little red crosses as a badge, and, most of them, chanted
the prayer for the confusion of God's enemies with the expectation of an
answer to be given through the medium of a more signal personage than
Fra Domenico.  This good Frate in his flame-coloured cope was now
kneeling before the little altar on which the Sacrament was deposited,
awaiting his summons.

On the Franciscan side of the Loggia there was no chanting and no
flame-colour: only silence and greyness.  But there was this
counterbalancing difference, that the Franciscans had two champions: a
certain Fra Giuliano was to pair with Fra Domenico, while the original
champion, Fra Francesco, confined his challenge to Savonarola.

"Surely," thought the men perched uneasily on the rods and pillars, "all
must be ready now.  This chanting might stop, and we should see better
when the Frati are moving towards the platform."

But the Frati were not to be seen moving yet.  Pale Franciscan faces
were looking uneasily over the boarding at that flame-coloured cope.  It
had an evil look and might be enchanted, so that a false miracle would
be wrought by magic.  Your monk may come whole out of the fire, and yet
it may be the work of the devil.

And now there was passing to and fro between the Loggia and the marble
terrace of the Palazzo, and the roar of chanting became a little
quieter, for every one at a distance was beginning to watch more
eagerly.  But it soon appeared that the new movement was not a
beginning, but an obstacle to beginning.  The dignified Florentines
appointed to preside over this affair as moderators on each side, went
in and out of the Palace, and there was much debate with the
Franciscans.  But at last it was clear that Fra Domenico, conspicuous in
his flame-colour, was being fetched towards the Palace.  Probably the
fire had already been kindled--it was difficult to see at a distance--
and the miracle was going to begin.

Not at all.  The flame-coloured cope disappeared within the Palace; then
another Dominican was fetched away; and for a long while everything went
on as before--the tiresome chanting, which was not miraculous, and Fra
Girolamo in his white vestment standing just in the same place.  But at
last something happened: Fra Domenico was seen coming out of the Palace
again, and returning to his brethren.  He had changed all his clothes
with a brother monk, but he was guarded on each flank by a Franciscan,
lest coming into the vicinity of Savonarola he should be enchanted
again.

"Ah, then," thought the distant spectators, a little less conscious of
cramped limbs and hunger, "Fra Domenico is not going to enter the fire.
It is Fra Girolamo who offers himself after all.  We shall see him move
presently, and if he comes out of the flames we shall have a fine view
of him!"

But Fra Girolamo did not move, except with the ordinary action
accompanying speech.  The speech was bold and firm, perhaps somewhat
ironically remonstrant, like that of Elijah to the priests of Baal,
demanding the cessation of these trivial delays.  But speech is the most
irritating kind of argument for those who are out of hearing, cramped in
the limbs, and empty in the stomach.  And what need was there for
speech?  If the miracle did not begin, it could be no one's fault but
Fra Girolamo's, who might put an end to all difficulties by offering
himself now the fire was ready, as he had been forward enough to do when
there was no fuel in sight.

More movement to and fro, more discussion; and the afternoon seemed to
be slipping away all the faster because the clouds had gathered, and
changed the light on everything, and sent a chill through the
spectators, hungry in mind and body.

_Now_ it was the crucifix which Fra Domenico wanted to carry into the
fire and must not be allowed to profane in that manner.  After some
little resistance Savonarola gave way to this objection, and thus had
the advantage of making one more concession; but he immediately placed
in Fra Domenico's hands the vessel containing the consecrated Host.  The
idea that the presence of the sacred Mystery might in the worst
extremity avert the ordinary effects of fire hovered in his mind as a
possibility; but the issue on which he counted was of a more positive
kind.  In taking up the Host he said quietly, as if he were only doing
what had been presupposed from the first--

"Since they are not willing that you should enter with the crucifix, my
brother, enter simply with the Sacrament."

New horror in the Franciscans; new firmness in Savonarola.  "It was
impious presumption to carry the Sacrament into the fire: if it were
burned the scandal would be great in the minds of the weak and
ignorant."

"Not at all: even if it were burned, the Accidents only would be
consumed, the Substance would remain."  Here was a question that might
be argued till set of sun and remain as elastic as ever; and no one
could propose settling it by proceeding to the trial, since it was
essentially a preliminary question.  It was only necessary that both
sides should remain firm--that the Franciscans should persist in not
permitting the Host to be carried into the fire, and that Fra Domenico
should persist in refusing to enter without it.

Meanwhile the clouds were getting darker, the air chiller.  Even the
chanting was missed now it had given way to inaudible argument; and the
confused sounds of talk from all points of the Piazza, showing that
expectation was everywhere relaxing, contributed to the irritating
presentiment that nothing decisive would be done.  Here and there a
dropping shout was heard; then, more frequent shouts in a rising scale
of scorn.

"Light the fire and drive them in!"

"Let us have a smell of roast--we want our dinner!"

"Come Prophet, let us know whether anything is to happen before the
twenty-four hours are over!"

"Yes, yes, what's your last vision?"

"Oh, he's got a dozen in his inside; they're the small change for a
miracle!"

"Ola, Frate, where are you?  Never mind wasting the fuel!"

Still the same movement to and fro between the Loggia and the Palace;
still the same debate, slow and unintelligible to the multitude as the
colloquies of insects that touch antennas to no other apparent effect
than that of going and coming.  But an interpretation was not long
wanting to unheard debates in which Fra Girolamo was constantly a
speaker: it was he who was hindering the trial; everybody was appealing
to him now, and he was hanging back.

Soon the shouts ceased to be distinguishable, and were lost in an uproar
not simply of voices, but of clashing metal and trampling feet.  The
suggestions of the irritated people had stimulated old impulses in Dolfo
Spini and his band of Compagnacci; it seemed an opportunity not to be
lost for putting an end to Florentine difficulties by getting possession
of the arch-hypocrite's person; and there was a vigorous rush of the
armed men towards the Loggia, thrusting the people aside, or driving
them on to the file of soldiery stationed in front of the Palace.  At
this movement, everything was suspended both with monks and embarrassed
magistrates except the palpitating watch to see what would come of the
struggle.

But the Loggia was well guarded by the band under the brave Salviati;
the soldiers of the Signoria assisted in the repulse; and the trampling
and rushing were all backward again towards the Tetto de' Pisani, when
the blackness of the heavens seemed to intensify in this moment of utter
confusion; and the rain, which had already been felt in scattered drops,
began to fall with rapidly growing violence, wetting the fuel, and
running in streams off the platform, wetting the weary hungry people to
the skin, and driving every man's disgust and rage inwards to ferment
there in the damp darkness.

Everybody knew now that the Trial by Fire was not to happen.  The
Signoria was doubtless glad of the rain, as an obvious reason, better
than any pretext, for declaring that both parties might go home.  It was
the issue which Savonarola had expected and desired; yet it would be an
ill description of what he felt to say that he was glad.  As that rain
fell, and plashed on the edge of the Loggia, and sent spray over the
altar and all garments and faces, the Frate knew that the demand for him
to enter the fire was at an end.  But he knew too, with a certainty as
irresistible as the damp chill that had taken possession of his frame,
that the design of his enemies was fulfilled, and that his honour was
not saved.  He knew that he should have to make his way to San Marco
again through the enraged crowd, and that the hearts of many friends who
would once have defended him with their lives would now be turned
against him.

When the rain had ceased he asked for a guard from the Signoria, and it
was given him.  Had he said that he was willing to die for the work of
his life?  Yes, and he had not spoken falsely.  But to die in
dishonour--held up to scorn as a hypocrite and a false prophet?  "O God!
_that_ is not martyrdom!  It is the blotting out of a life that has been
a protest against wrong.  Let me die because of the worth that is in me,
not because of my weakness."

The rain had ceased, and the light from the breaking clouds fell on
Savonarola as he left the Loggia in the midst of his guard, walking as
he had come, with the Sacrament in his hand.  But there seemed no glory
in the light that fell on him now, no smile of heaven: it was only that
light which shines on, patiently and impartially, justifying or
condemning by simply showing all things in the slow history of their
ripening.  He heard no blessing, no tones of pity, but only taunts and
threats.  He knew this was a foretaste of coming bitterness; yet his
courage mounted under all moral attack, and he showed no sign of dismay.

"Well parried, Frate!" said Tito, as Savonarola descended the steps of
the Loggia.  "But I fear your career at Florence is ended.  What say
you, my Niccolo?"

"It is a pity his falsehoods were not all of a wise sort," said
Macchiavelli, with a melancholy shrug.  "With the times so much on his
side as they are about Church affairs, he might have done something
great."



CHAPTER SIXTY SIX.

A MASQUE OF THE FURIES.

The next day was Palm Sunday, or Olive Sunday, as it was chiefly called
in the olive-growing Valdarno; and the morning sun shone with a more
delicious clearness for the yesterday's rain.  Once more Savonarola
mounted the pulpit in San Marco, and saw a flock around him whose faith
in him was still unshaken; and this morning in calm and sad sincerity he
declared himself ready to die: in front of all visions he saw his own
doom.  Once more he uttered the benediction, and saw the faces of men
and women lifted towards him in venerating love.  Then he descended the
steps of the pulpit and turned away from that sight for ever.

For before the sun had set Florence was in an uproar.  The passions
which had been roused the day before had been smouldering through that
quiet morning, and had now burst out again with a fury not unassisted by
design, and not without official connivance.  The uproar had begun at
the Duomo in an attempt of some Compagnacci to hinder the evening
sermon, which the Piagnoni had assembled to hear.  But no sooner had
men's blood mounted and the disturbances had become an affray than the
cry arose, "To San Marco! the fire to San Marco!"

And long before the daylight had died, both the church and convent were
being besieged by an enraged and continually increasing multitude.  Not
without resistance.  For the monks, long conscious of growing hostility
without, had arms within their walls, and some of them fought as
vigorously in their long white tunics as if they had been Knights
Templars.  Even the command of Savonarola could not prevail against the
impulse to self-defence in arms that were still muscular under the
Dominican serge.  There were laymen too who had not chosen to depart,
and some of them fought fiercely: there was firing from the high altar
close by the great crucifix, there was pouring of stones and hot embers
from the convent roof, there was close fighting with swords in the
cloisters.  Notwithstanding the force of the assailants, the attack
lasted till deep night.

The demonstrations of the Government had all been against the convent;
early in the attack guards had been sent for, not to disperse the
assailants, but to command all within the convent to lay down their
arms, all laymen to depart from it, and Savonarola himself to quit the
Florentine territory within twelve hours.  Had Savonarola quitted the
convent then, he could hardly have escaped being torn to pieces; he was
willing to go, but his friends hindered him.  It was felt to be a great
risk even for some laymen of high name to depart by the garden wall, but
among those who had chosen to do so was Francesco Valori, who hoped to
raise rescue from without.

And now when it was deep night--when the struggle could hardly have
lasted much longer, and the Compagnacci might soon have carried their
swords into the library, where Savonarola was praying with the Brethren
who had either not taken up arms or had laid them down at his command--
there came a second body of guards, commissioned by the Signoria to
demand the persons of Fra Girolamo and his two coadjutors, Fra Domenico
and Fra Salvestro.

Loud was the roar of triumphant hate when the light of lanterns showed
the Frate issuing from the door of the convent with a guard who promised
him no other safety than that of the prison.  The struggle now was, who
should get first in the stream that rushed up the narrow street to see
the Prophet carried back in ignominy to the Piazza where he had braved
it yesterday--who should be in the best place for reaching his ear with
insult, nay, if possible, for smiting him and kicking him.  This was not
difficult for some of the armed Compagnacci who were not prevented from
mixing themselves with the guards.

When Savonarola felt himself dragged and pushed along in the midst of
that hooting multitude; when lanterns were lifted to show him deriding
faces; when he felt himself spit upon, smitten and kicked with grossest
words of insult, it seemed to him that the worst bitterness of life was
past.  If men judged him guilty, and were bent on having his blood, it
was only death that awaited him.  But the worst drop of bitterness can
never be wrung on to our lips from without: the lowest depth of
resignation is not to be found in martyrdom; it is only to be found when
we have covered our heads in silence and felt, "I am not worthy to be a
martyr; the Truth shall prosper, but not by me."

But that brief imperfect triumph of insulting the Frate, who had soon
disappeared under the doorway of the Old Palace, was only like the taste
of blood to the tiger.  Were there not the houses of the hypocrite's
friends to be sacked?  Already one-half of the armed multitude, too much
in the rear to share greatly in the siege of the convent, had been
employed in the more profitable work of attacking rich houses, not with
planless desire for plunder, but with that discriminating selection of
such as belonged to chief Piagnoni, which showed that the riot was under
guidance, and that the rabble with clubs and staves was well officered
by sword-girt Compagnacci.  Was there not--next criminal after the
Frate--the ambitious Francesco Valori, suspected of wanting with the
Frate's help to make himself a Doge or Gonfaloniere for life?  And the
grey-haired man who, eight months ago, had lifted his arm and his voice
in such ferocious demand for justice on five of his fellow-citizens,
only escaped from San Marco to experience what _others_ called justice--
to see his house surrounded by an angry, greedy multitude, to see his
wife shot dead with an arrow, and to be himself murdered, as he was on
his way to answer a summons to the Palazzo, by the swords of men named
Ridolfi and Tornabuoni.

In this way that Masque of the Furies, called Riot, was played on in
Florence through the hours of night and early morning.

But the chief director was not visible: he had his reasons for issuing
his orders from a private retreat, being of rather too high a name to
let his red feather be seen waving amongst all the work that was to be
done before the dawn.  The retreat was the same house and the same room
in a quiet street between Santa Croce and San Marco, where we have seen
Tito paying a secret visit to Dolfo Spini.  Here the Captain of the
Compagnacci sat through this memorable night, receiving visitors who
came and went, and went and came, some of them in the guise of armed
Compagnacci, others dressed obscurely and without visible arms.  There
was abundant wine on the table, with drinking-cups for chance comers and
though Spini was on his guard against excessive drinking, he took enough
from time to time to heighten the excitement produced by the news that
was being brought to him continually.

Among the obscurely-dressed visitors Ser Ceccone was one of the most
frequent, and as the hours advanced towards the morning twilight he had
remained as Spini's constant companion, together with Francesco Cei, who
was then in rather careless hiding in Florence, expecting to have his
banishment revoked when the Frate's fall had been accomplished.

The tapers had burnt themselves into low shapeless masses, and holes in
the shutters were just marked by a sombre outward light, when Spini, who
had started from his seat and walked up and down with an angry flush on
his face at some talk that had been going forward with those two
unmilitary companions, burst out--

"The devil spit him! he shall pay for it, though.  Ha, ha! the claws
shall be down on him when he little thinks of them.  So _he_ was to be
the great man after all!  He's been pretending to chuck everything
towards my cap, as if I were a blind beggarman, and all the while he's
been winking and filling his own scarsella.  I should like to hang skins
about him and set my hounds on him!  And he's got that fine ruby of
mine, I was fool enough to give him yesterday.  Malediction!  And he was
laughing at me in his sleeve two years ago, and spoiling the best plan
that ever was laid.  I was a fool for trusting myself with a rascal who
had long-twisted contrivances that nobody could see to the end of but
himself."

"A Greek, too, who dropped into Florence with gems packed about him,"
said Francesco Cei, who had a slight smile of amusement on his face at
Spini's fuming.  "You did _not_ choose your confidant very wisely, my
Dolfo."

"He's a cursed deal cleverer than you, Francesco, and handsomer too,"
said Spini, turning on his associate with a general desire to worry
anything that presented itself.

"I humbly conceive," said Ser Ceccone, "that Messer Francesco's poetic
genius will outweigh--"

"Yes, yes, rub your hands!  I hate that notary's trick of yours,"
interrupted Spini, whose patronage consisted largely in this sort of
frankness.  "But there comes Taddeo, or somebody: now's the time!  What
news, eh?" he went on, as two Compagnacci entered with heated looks.

"Bad!" said one.  "The people have made up their minds they were going
to have the sacking of Soderini's house, and now they have been balked
we shall have them turning on us, if we don't take care.  I suspect
there are some Mediceans buzzing about among them, and we may see them
attacking your palace over the bridge before long, unless we can find a
bait for them another way."

"I have it!" said Spini, and seizing Taddeo by the belt he drew him
aside to give him directions, while the other went on telling Cei how
the Signoria had interfered about Soderini's house.

"Ecco!" exclaimed Spini, presently, giving Taddeo a slight push towards
the door.  "Go, and make quick work."



CHAPTER SIXTY SEVEN.

WAITING BY THE RIVER.

About the time when the two Compagnacci went on their errand, there was
another man who, on the opposite side of the Arno, was also going out
into the chill grey twilight.  His errand, apparently, could have no
relation to theirs; he was making his way to the brink of the river at a
spot which, though within the city walls, was overlooked by no
dwellings, and which only seemed the more shrouded and lonely for the
warehouses and granaries which at some little distance backward turned
their shoulders to the river.  There was a sloping width of long grass
and rushes made all the more dank by broad gutters which here and there
emptied themselves into the Arno.

The gutters and the loneliness were the attraction that drew this man to
come and sit down among the grass, and bend over the waters that ran
swiftly in the channelled slope at his side.  For he had once had a
large piece of bread brought to him by one of those friendly runlets,
and more than once a raw carrot and apple-parings.  It was worth while
to wait for such chances in a place where there was no one to see, and
often in his restless wakefulness he came to watch here before daybreak;
it might save him for one day the need of that silent begging which
consisted in sitting on a church-step by the wayside out beyond the
Porta San Frediano.

For Baldassarre hated begging so much that he would perhaps have chosen
to die rather than make even that silent appeal, but for one reason that
made him desire to live.  It was no longer a hope; it was only that
possibility which clings to every idea that has taken complete
possession of the mind: the sort of possibility that makes a woman watch
on a headland for the ship which held something dear, though all her
neighbours are certain that the ship was a wreck long years ago.  After
he had come out of the convent hospital, where the monks of San Miniato
had taken care of him as long as he was helpless; after he had watched
in vain for the Wife who was to help him, and had begun to think that
she was dead of the pestilence that seemed to fill all the space since
the night he parted from her, he had been unable to conceive any way in
which sacred vengeance could satisfy itself through his arm.  His knife
was gone, and he was too feeble in body to win another by work, too
feeble in mind, even if he had had the knife, to contrive that it should
serve its one purpose.  He was a shattered, bewildered, lonely old man;
yet he desired to live: _he_ waited for something of which he had no
distinct vision--something dim, formless--that startled him, and made
strong pulsations within him, like that unknown thing which we look for
when we start from sleep, though no voice or touch has waked us.
Baldassarre desired to live; and therefore he crept out in the grey
light, and seated himself in the long grass, and watched the waters that
had a faint promise in them.

Meanwhile the Compagnacci were busy at their work.  The formidable bands
of armed men, left to do their will with very little interference from
an embarrassed if not conniving Signoria, had parted into two masses,
but both were soon making their way by different roads towards the Arno.
The smaller mass was making for the Ponte Rubaconte, the larger for the
Ponte Vecchio; but in both the same words had passed from mouth to mouth
as a signal, and almost every man of the multitude knew that he was
going to the Via de' Bardi to sack a house there.  If he knew no other
reason, could he demand a better?

The armed Compagnacci knew something more, for a brief word of command
flies quickly, and the leaders of the two streams of rabble had a
perfect understanding that they would meet before a certain house a
little towards the eastern end of the Via de' Bardi, where the master
would probably be in bed, and be surprised in his morning sleep.

But the master of that house was neither sleeping nor in bed; he had not
been in bed that night.  For Tito's anxiety to quit Florence had been
stimulated by the events of the previous day: investigations would
follow in which appeals might be made to him delaying his departure: and
in all delay he had an uneasy sense that there was danger.  Falsehood
had prospered and waxed strong; but it had nourished the twin life,
Fear.  He no longer wore his armour, he was no longer afraid of
Baldassarre; but from the corpse of that dead fear a spirit had risen--
the undying _habit_ of fear.  He felt he should not be safe till he was
out of this fierce, turbid Florence; and now he was ready to go.  Maso
was to deliver up his house to the new tenant; his horses and mules were
awaiting him in San Gallo; Tessa and the children had been lodged for
the night in the Borgo outside the gate, and would be dressed in
readiness to mount the mules and join him.  He descended the stone steps
into the courtyard, he passed through the great doorway, not the same
Tito, but nearly as brilliant as on the day when he had first entered
that house and made the mistake of falling in love with Romola.  The
mistake was remedied now: the old life was cast off, and was soon to be
far behind him.

He turned with rapid steps towards the Piazza dei Mozzi, intending to
pass over the Ponte Rubaconte; but as he went along certain sounds came
upon his ears that made him turn round and walk yet more quickly in the
opposite direction.  Was the mob coming into Oltrarno?  It was a
vexation, for he would have preferred the more private road.  He must
now go by the Ponte Vecchio; and unpleasant sensations made him draw his
mantle close round him, and walk at his utmost speed.  There was no one
to see him in that grey twilight.  But before he reached the end of the
Via de' Bardi, like sounds fell on his ear again, and this time they
were much louder and nearer.  Could he have been deceived before?  The
mob must be coming over the Ponte Vecchio.  Again he turned, from an
impulse of fear that was stronger than reflection; but it was only to be
assured that the mob was actually entering the street from the opposite
end.  He chose not to go back to his house: after all they would not
attack _him_.  Still, he had some valuables about him; and all things
except reason and order are possible with a mob.  But necessity does the
work of courage.  He went on towards the Ponte Vecchio, the rush and the
trampling and the confused voices getting so loud before him that he had
ceased to hear them behind.

For he had reached the end of the street, and the crowd pouring from the
bridge met him at the turning and hemmed in his way.  He had not time to
wonder at a sudden shout before he felt himself surrounded, not, in the
first instance, by an unarmed rabble, but by armed Compagnacci; the next
sensation was that his cap fell off, and that he was thrust violently
forward amongst the rabble, along the narrow passage of the bridge.
Then he distinguished the shouts, "Piagnone!  Medicean!  Piagnone!
Throw him over the bridge!"

His mantle was being torn off him with strong pulls that would have
throttled him if the fibula had not given way.  Then his scarsella was
snatched at; but all the while he was being hustled and dragged; and the
snatch failed--his scarsella still hung at his side.  Shouting, yelling,
half motiveless execration rang stunningly in his ears, spreading even
amongst those who had not yet seen him, and only knew there was a man to
be reviled.  Tito's horrible dread was that he should be struck down or
trampled on before he reached the open arches that surmount the centre
of the bridge.  There was one hope for him, that they might throw him
over before they had wounded him or beaten the strength out of him; and
his whole soul was absorbed in that one hope and its obverse terror.

Yes--they _were_ at the arches.  In that moment Tito, with bloodless
face and eyes dilated, had one of the self-preserving inspirations that
come in extremity.  With a sudden desperate effort he mastered the clasp
of his belt, and flung belt and scarsella forward towards a yard of
clear space against the parapet, crying in a ringing voice--

"There are diamonds! there is gold!"

In the instant the hold on him was relaxed, and there was a rush towards
the scarsella.  He threw himself on the parapet with a desperate leap,
and the next moment plunged--plunged with a great plash into the dark
river far below.

It was his chance of salvation; and it was a good chance.  His life had
been saved once before by his fine swimming, and as he rose to the
surface again after his long dive he had a sense of deliverance.  He
struck out with all the energy of his strong prime, and the current
helped him.  If he could only swim beyond the Ponte alla Carrara he
might land in a remote part of the city, and even yet reach San Gallo.
Life was still before him.  And the idiot mob, shouting and bellowing on
the bridge there, would think he was drowned.

They did think so.  Peering over the parapet along the dark stream, they
could not see afar off the moving blackness of the floating hair, and
the velvet tunic-sleeves.

It was only from the other way that a pale olive face could be seen
looking white above the dark water: a face not easy even for the
indifferent to forget, with its square forehead, the long low arch of
the eyebrows, and the long lustrous agate-like eyes.  Onward the face
went on the dark current, with inflated quivering nostrils, with the
blue veins distended on the temples.  One bridge was passed--the bridge
of Santa Trinita.  Should he risk landing now rather than trust to his
strength?  No.  He heard, or fancied he heard, yells and cries pursuing
him.  Terror pressed him most from the side of his fellow-men: he was
less afraid of indefinite chances, and he swam on, panting and
straining.  He was not so fresh as he would have been if he had passed
the night in sleep.

Yet the next bridge--the last bridge--was passed.  He was conscious of
it; but in the tumult of his blood, he could only feel vaguely that he
was safe and might land.  But where?  The current was having its way
with him: he hardly knew where he was: exhaustion was bringing on the
dreamy state that precedes unconsciousness.

But now there were eyes that discerned him--aged eyes, strong for the
distance.  Baldassarre, looking up blankly from the search in the runlet
that brought him nothing, had seen a white object coming along the
broader stream.  Could that be any fortunate chance for _him_?  He
looked and looked till the object gathered form: then he leaned forward
with a start as he sat among the rank green stems, and his eyes seemed
to be filled with a new light.  Yet he only watched--motionless.
Something was being brought to him.

The next instant a man's body was cast violently on the grass two yards
from him, and he started forward like a panther, clutching the velvet
tunic as he fell forward on the body and flashed a look in the man's
face.

Dead--was he dead?  The eyes were rigid.  But no, it could not be--
Justice had brought him.  Men looked dead sometimes, and yet the life
came back into them.  Baldassarre did not feel feeble in that moment.
He knew just what he could do.  He got his large fingers within the neck
of the tunic and held them there, kneeling on one knee beside the body
and watching the face.  There was a fierce hope in his heart, but it was
mixed with trembling.  In his eyes there was only fierceness: all the
slow-burning remnant of life within him seemed to have leaped into
flame.

Rigid--rigid still.  Those eyes with the half-fallen lids were locked
against vengeance.  _Could_ it be that he was dead?  There was nothing
to measure the time: it seemed long enough for hope to freeze into
despair.

Surely at last the eyelids were quivering: the eyes were no longer
rigid, There was a vibrating light in them: they opened wide.

"Ah, yes!  You see me--you know me!"

Tito knew him; but he did not know whether it was life or death that had
brought him into the presence of his injured father.  It might be
death--and death might mean this chill gloom with the face of the
hideous past hanging over him for ever.

But now Baldassarre's only dread was, lest the young limbs should escape
him.  He pressed his knuckles against the round throat, and knelt upon
the chest with all the force of his aged frame.  Let death come now!

Again he kept his watch on the face.  And when the eyes were rigid
again, he dared not trust them.  He would never lose his hold till some
one came and found them.  Justice would send some witness, and then he,
Baldassarre, would declare that he had killed this traitor, to whom he
had once been a father.  They would perhaps believe him now, and then he
would be content with the struggle of justice on earth--then he would
desire to die with his hold on this body, and follow the traitor to hell
that he might clutch him there.

And so he knelt, and so he pressed his knuckles against the round
throat, without trusting to the seeming death, till the light got strong
and he could kneel no longer.  Then he sat on the body, still clutching
the neck of the tunic.  But the hours went on, and no witness came.  No
eyes descried afar off the two human bodies among the tall grass by the
riverside.  Florence was busy with greater affairs, and the preparation
of a deeper tragedy.

Not long after those two bodies were lying in the grass, Savonarola was
being tortured, and crying out in his agony, "I will confess!"

It was not until the sun was westward that a waggon drawn by a mild grey
ox came to the edge of the grassy margin, and as the man who led it was
leaning to gather up the round stones that lay heaped in readiness to be
carried away, he detected some startling object in the grass.  The aged
man had fallen forward, and his dead clutch was on the garment of the
other.  It was not possible to separate them: nay, it was better to put
them into the waggon and carry them as they were into the great Piazza,
that notice might be given to the Eight.

As the waggon entered the frequented streets there was a growing crowd
escorting it with its strange burden.  No one knew the bodies for a long
while, for the aged face had fallen forward, half hiding the younger.
But before they had been moved out of sight, they had been recognised.

"I know that old man," Piero di Cosimo had testified.  "I painted his
likeness once.  He is the prisoner who clutched Melema on the steps of
the Duomo."

"He is perhaps the same old man who appeared at supper in my gardens,"
said Bernardo Rucellai, one of the Eight.  "I had forgotten him.  I
thought he had died in prison.  But there is no knowing the truth now."

Who shall put his finger on the work of justice, and say, "It is there"?
Justice is like the Kingdom of God--it is not without us as a fact, it
is within us as a great yearning.



CHAPTER SIXTY EIGHT.

ROMOLA'S WAKING.

Romola in her boat passed from dreaming into long deep sleep, and then
again from deep sleep into busy dreaming, till at last she felt herself
stretching out her arms in the court of the Bargello, where the
flickering flames of the tapers seemed to get stronger and stronger till
the dark scene was blotted out with light.  Her eyes opened and she saw
it was the light of morning.  Her boat was lying still in a little
creek; on her right-hand lay the speckless sapphire-blue of the
Mediterranean; on her left one of those scenes which were and still are
repeated again and again like a sweet rhythm, on the shores of that
loveliest sea.

In a deep curve of the mountains lay a breadth of green land, curtained
by gentle tree-shadowed slopes leaning towards the rocky heights.  Up
these slopes might be seen here and there, gleaming between the
tree-tops, a pathway leading to a little irregular mass of building that
seemed to have clambered in a hasty way up the mountain-side, and taken
a difficult stand there for the sake of showing the tall belfry as a
sight of beauty to the scattered and clustered houses of the village
below.  The rays of the newly-risen sun fell obliquely on the westward
horn of this crescent-shaped nook: all else lay in dewy shadow.  No
sound came across the stillness; the very waters seemed to have curved
themselves there for rest.

The delicious sun-rays fell on Romola and thrilled her gently like a
caress.  She lay motionless, hardly watching the scene; rather, feeling
simply the presence of peace and beauty.  While we are still in our
youth there can always come, in our early waking, moments when mere
passive existence is itself a Lethe, when the exquisiteness of subtle
indefinite sensation creates a bliss which is without memory and without
desire.  As the soft warmth penetrated Romola's young limbs, as her eyes
rested on this sequestered luxuriance, it seemed that the agitating past
had glided away like that dark scene in the Bargello, and that the
afternoon dreams of her girlhood had really come back to her.  For a
minute or two the oblivion was untroubled; she did not even think that
she could rest here for ever, she only felt that she rested.  Then she
became distinctly conscious that she was lying in the boat which had
been bearing her over the waters all through the night.  Instead of
bringing her to death, it had been the gently lulling cradle of a new
life.  And in spite of her evening despair she was glad that the morning
had come to her again: glad to think that she was resting in the
familiar sunlight rather than in the unknown regions of death.  _Could_
she not rest here?  No sound from Florence would reach her.  Already
oblivion was troubled; from behind the golden haze were piercing domes
and towers and walls, parted by a river and enclosed by the green hills.

She rose from her reclining posture and sat up in the boat, willing, if
she could, to resist the rush of thoughts that urged themselves along
with the conjecture how far the boat had carried her.  Why need she
mind?  This was a sheltered nook where there were simple villagers who
would not harm her.  For a little while, at least, she might rest and
resolve on nothing.  Presently she would go and get some bread and milk,
and then she would nestle in the green quiet, and feel that there was a
pause in her life.  She turned to watch the crescent-shaped valley, that
she might get back the soothing sense of peace and beauty which she had
felt in her first waking.

She had not been in this attitude of contemplation more than a few
minutes when across the stillness there came a piercing cry; not a brief
cry, but continuous and more and more intense.  Romola felt sure it was
the cry of a little child in distress that no one came to help.  She
started up and put one foot on the side of the boat ready to leap on to
the beach; but she paused there and listened: the mother of the child
must be near, the cry must soon cease.  But it went on, and drew Romola
so irresistibly, seeming the more piteous to her for the sense of peace
which had preceded it, that she jumped on to the beach and walked many
paces before she knew what direction she would take.  The cry, she
thought, came from some rough garden growth many yards on her
right-hand, where she saw a half-ruined hovel.  She climbed over a low
broken stone fence, and made her way across patches of weedy green crops
and ripe but neglected corn.  The cry grew plainer, and convinced that
she was right she hastened towards the hovel; but even in that hurried
walk she felt an oppressive change in the air as she left the sea
behind.  Was there some taint lurking amongst the green luxuriance that
had seemed such an inviting shelter from the heat of the coming day?
She could see the opening into the hovel now, and the cry was darting
through her like a pain.  The next moment her foot was within the
doorway, but the sight she beheld in the sombre light arrested her with
a shock of awe and horror.  On the straw, with which the floor was
scattered, lay three dead bodies, one of a tall man, one of a girl about
eight years old, and one of a young woman whose long black hair was
being clutched and pulled by a living child--the child that was sending
forth the piercing cry.  Romola's experience in the haunts of death and
disease made thought and action prompt: she lifted the little living
child, and in trying to soothe it on her bosom, still sent to look at
the bodies and see if they were really dead.  The strongly marked type
of race in their features, and their peculiar garb, made her conjecture
that they were Spanish or Portuguese Jews, who had perhaps been put
ashore and abandoned there by rapacious sailors, to whom their property
remained as a prey.  Such things were happening continually to Jews
compelled to abandon their homes by the Inquisition: the cruelty of
greed thrust them from the sea, and the cruelty of superstition thrust
them back to it.

"But, surely," thought Romola, "I shall find some woman in the village
whose mother's heart will not let her refuse to tend this helpless
child--if the real mother is indeed dead."

This doubt remained, because while the man and girl looked emaciated and
also showed signs of having been long dead, the woman seemed to have
been hardier, and had not quite lost the robustness of her form.
Romola, kneeling, was about to lay her hand on the heart; but as she
lifted the piece of yellow woollen drapery that lay across the bosom,
she saw the purple spots which marked the familiar pestilence.  Then it
struck her that if the villagers knew of this, she might have more
difficulty than she had expected in getting help from them; they would
perhaps shrink from her with that child in her arms.  But she had money
to offer them, and they would not refuse to give her some goat's milk in
exchange for it.

She set out at once towards the village, her mind filled now with the
effort to soothe the little dark creature, and with wondering how she
should win some woman to be good to it.  She could not help hoping a
little in a certain awe she had observed herself to inspire, when she
appeared, unknown and unexpected, in her religious dress.  As she passed
across a breadth of cultivated ground, she noticed, with wonder, that
little patches of corn mingled with the other crops had been left to
over-ripeness untouched by the sickle, and that golden apples and dark
figs lay rotting on the weedy earth.  There were grassy spaces within
sight, but no cow, or sheep, or goat.  The stillness began to have
something fearful in it to Romola; she hurried along towards the
thickest cluster of houses, where there would be the most life to appeal
to on behalf of the helpless life she carried in her arms.  But she had
picked up two figs, and bit little pieces from the sweet pulp to still
the child with.

She entered between two lines of dwellings.  It was time that villagers
should have been stirring long ago, but not a soul was in sight.  The
air was becoming more and more oppressive, laden, it seemed, with some
horrible impurity.  There was a door open; she looked in, and saw grim
emptiness.  Another open door; and through that she saw a man lying dead
with all his garments on, his head lying athwart a spade handle, and an
earthenware cruse in his hand, as if he had fallen suddenly.

Romola felt horror taking possession of her.  Was she in a village of
the unburied dead?  She wanted to listen if there were any faint sound,
but the child cried out afresh when she ceased to feed it, and the cry
filled her ears.  At last she saw a figure crawling slowly out of a
house, and soon sinking back in a sitting posture against the wall.  She
hastened towards the figure; it was a young woman in fevered anguish,
and she, too, held a pitcher in her hand.  As Romola approached her she
did not start; the one need was too absorbing for any other idea to
impress itself on her.

"Water! get me water!" she said, with a moaning utterance.

Romola stooped to take the pitcher, and said gently in her ear, "You
shall have water; can you point towards the well?"

The hand was lifted towards the more distant end of the little street,
and Romola set off at once with as much speed as she could use under the
difficulty of carrying the pitcher as well as feeding the child.  But
the little one was getting more content as the morsels of sweet pulp
were repeated, and ceased to distress her with its cry, so that she
could give a less distracted attention to the objects around her.

The well lay twenty yards or more beyond the end of the street, and as
Romola was approaching it her eyes were directed to the opposite green
slope immediately below the church.  High up, on a patch of grass
between the trees, she had descried a cow and a couple of goats, and she
tried to trace a line of path that would lead her close to that cheering
sight, when once she had done her errand to the well.  Occupied in this
way, she was not aware that she was very near the well, and that some
one approaching it on the other side had fixed a pair of astonished eyes
upon her.

Romola certainly presented a sight which, at, that moment and in that
place, could hardly have been seen without some pausing and palpitation.
With her gaze fixed intently on the distant slope, the long lines of
her thick grey garment giving a gliding character to her rapid walk, her
hair rolling backward and illuminated on the left side by the sun-rays,
the little olive baby on her right arm now looking out with jet-black
eyes, she might well startle that youth of fifteen, accustomed to swing
the censer in the presence of a Madonna less fair and marvellous than
this.

"She carries a pitcher in her hand--to fetch water for the sick.  It is
the Holy Mother, come to take care of the people who have the
pestilence."

It was a sight of awe: she would, perhaps, be angry with those who
fetched water for themselves only.  The youth flung down his vessel in
terror, and Romola, aware now of some one near her, saw the black and
white figure fly as if for dear life towards the slope she had just been
contemplating.  But remembering the parched sufferer, she half-filled
her pitcher quickly and hastened back.

Entering the house to look for a small cup, she saw salt meat and meal:
there were no signs of want in the dwelling.  With nimble movement she
seated baby on the ground, and lifted a cup of water to the sufferer,
who drank eagerly and then closed her eyes and leaned her head backward,
seeming to give herself up to the sense of relief.  Presently she opened
her eyes, and, looking at Romola, said languidly--

"Who are you?"

"I came over the sea," said Romola, "I only came this morning.  Are all
the people dead in these houses?"

"I think they are all ill now--all that are not dead.  My father and my
sister lie dead upstairs, and there is no one to bury them: and soon I
shall die."

"Not so, I hope," said Romola.  "I am come to take care of you.  I am
used to the pestilence; I am not afraid.  But there must be some left
who are not ill.  I saw a youth running towards the mountain when I went
to the well."

"I cannot tell.  When the pestilence came, a great many people went
away, and drove off the cows and goats.  Give me more water!"

Romola, suspecting that if she followed the direction of the youth's
flight, she should find some men and women who were still healthy and
able, determined to seek them out at once, that she might at least win
them to take care of the child, and leave her free to come back and see
how many living needed help, and how many dead needed burial.  She
trusted to her powers of persuasion to conquer the aid of the timorous,
when once she knew what was to be done.

Promising the sick woman to come back to her, she lifted the dark
bantling again, and set off towards the slope.  She felt no burden of
choice on her now, no longing for death.  She was thinking how she would
go to the other sufferers, as she had gone to that fevered woman.

But, with the child on her arm, it was not so easy to her as usual to
walk up a slope, and it seemed a long while before the winding path took
her near the cow and the goats.  She was beginning herself to feel faint
from heat, hunger, and thirst, and as she reached a double turning, she
paused to consider whether she would not wait near the cow, which some
one was likely to come and milk soon, rather than toil up to the church
before she had taken any rest.  Raising her eyes to measure the steep
distance, she saw peeping between the boughs, not more than five yards
off, a broad round face, watching her attentively, and lower down the
black skirt of a priest's garment, and a hand grasping a bucket.  She
stood mutely observing, and the face, too, remained motionless.  Romola
had often witnessed the overpowering force of dread in cases of
pestilence, and she was cautious.

Raising her voice in a tone of gentle pleading, she said, "I came over
the sea.  I am hungry, and so is the child.  Will you not give us some
milk?"

Romola had divined part of the truth, but she had not divined that
preoccupation of the priest's mind which charged her words with a
strange significance.  Only a little while ago, the young acolyte had
brought word to the Padre that he had seen the Holy Mother with the
Babe, fetching water for the sick: she was as tall as the cypresses, and
had a light about her head, and she looked up at the church.  The
pievano [parish priest] had not listened with entire belief: he had been
more than fifty years in the world without having any vision of the
Madonna, and he thought the boy might have misinterpreted the unexpected
appearance of a villager.  But he had been made uneasy, and before
venturing to come down and milk his cow, he had repeated many Aves.  The
pievano's conscience tormented him a little: he trembled at the
pestilence, but he also trembled at the thought of the mild-faced
Mother, conscious that that Invisible Mercy might demand something more
of him than prayers and "Hails."  In this state of mind--unable to
banish the image the boy had raised of the Mother with the glory about
her tending the sick--the pievano had come down to milk his cow, and had
suddenly caught sight of Romola pausing at the parted way.  Her pleading
words, with their strange refinement of tone and accent, instead of
being explanatory, had a preternatural sound for him.  Yet he did not
quite believe he saw the Holy Mother: he was in a state of alarmed
hesitation.  If anything miraculous were happening, he felt there was no
strong presumption that the miracle would be in his favour.  He dared
not run away; he dared not advance.

"Come down," said Romola, after a pause.  "Do not fear.  Fear rather to
deny food to the hungry when they ask you."

A moment after, the boughs were parted, and the complete figure of a
thickset priest with a broad, harmless face, his black frock much worn
and soiled, stood, bucket in hand, looking at her timidly, and still
keeping aloof as he took the path towards the cow in silence.

Romola followed him and watched him without speaking again, as he seated
himself against the tethered cow, and, when he had nervously drawn some
milk, gave it to her in a brass cup he carried with him in the bucket.
As Romola put the cup to the lips of the eager child, and afterwards
drank some milk herself, the Padre observed her from his wooden stool
with a timidity that changed its character a little.  He recognised the
Hebrew baby, he was certain that he had a substantial woman before him;
but there was still something strange and unaccountable in Romola's
presence in this spot, and the Padre had a presentiment that things were
going to change with him.  Moreover, that Hebrew baby was terribly
associated with the dread of pestilence.

Nevertheless, when Romola smiled at the little one sucking its own milky
lips, and stretched out the brass cup again, saying, "Give us more, good
father," he obeyed less nervously than before.

Romola on her side was not unobservant; and when the second supply of
milk had been drunk, she looked down at the round-headed man, and said
with mild decision--

"And now tell me, father, how this pestilence came, and why you let your
people die without the sacraments; and lie unburied.  For I am come over
the sea to help those who are left alive--and you, too, will help them
now."

He told her the story of the pestilence: and while he was telling it,
the youth, who had fled before, had come peeping and advancing
gradually, till at last he stood and watched the scene from behind a
neighbouring bush.

Three families of Jews, twenty souls in all, had been put ashore many
weeks ago, some of them already ill of the pestilence.  The villagers,
said the priest, had of course refused to give shelter to the
miscreants, otherwise than in a distant hovel, and under heaps of straw.
But when the strangers had died of the plague, and some of the people
had thrown the bodies into the sea, the sea had brought them back again
in a great storm, and everybody was smitten with terror.  A grave was
dug, and the bodies were buried; but then the pestilence attacked the
Christians, and the greater number of the villagers went away over the
mountain, driving away their few cattle, and carrying provisions.  The
priest had not fled; he had stayed and prayed for the people, and he had
prevailed on the youth Jacopo to stay with him; but he confessed that a
mortal terror of the plague had taken hold of him, and he had not dared
to go down into the valley.

"You will fear no longer, father," said Romola, in a tone of encouraging
authority; "you will come down with me, and we will see who is living,
and we will look for the dead to bury them.  I have walked about for
months where the pestilence was, and see, I am strong.  Jacopo will come
with us," she added, motioning to the peeping lad, who came slowly from
behind his defensive bush, as if invisible threads were dragging him.

"Come, Jacopo," said Romola again, smiling at him, "you will carry the
child for me.  See! your arms are strong, and I am tired."

That was a dreadful proposal to Jacopo, and to the priest also; but they
were both under a peculiar influence forcing them to obey.  The
suspicion that Romola was a supernatural form was dissipated, but their
minds were filled instead with the more effective sense that she was a
human being whom God had sent over the sea to command them.

"Now we will carry down the milk," said Romola, "and see if any one
wants it."

So they went all together down the slope, and that morning the sufferers
saw help come to them in their despair.  There were hardly more than a
score alive in the whole valley; but all of these were comforted, most
were saved, and the dead were buried.

In this way days, weeks, and months passed with Romola till the men were
digging and sowing again, till the women smiled at her as they carried
their great vases on their heads to the well, and the Hebrew baby was a
tottering tumbling Christian, Benedetto by name, having been baptised in
the church on the mountain-side.  But by that time she herself was
suffering from the fatigue and languor that must come after a continuous
strain on mind and body.  She had taken for her dwelling one of the
houses abandoned by their owners, standing a little aloof from the
village street; and here on a thick heap of clean straw--a delicious bed
for those who do not dream of down--she felt glad to lie still through
most of the daylight hours, taken care of along with the little
Benedetto by a woman whom the pestilence had widowed.

Every day the Padre and Jacopo and the small flock of surviving
villagers paid their visit to this cottage to see the blessed Lady, and
to bring her of their best as an offering--honey, fresh cakes, eggs, and
polenta.  It was a sight they could none of them forget, a sight they
all told of in their old age--how the sweet and sainted lady with her
fair face, her golden hair, and her brown eyes that had a blessing in
them, lay weary with her labours after she had been sent over the sea to
help them in their extremity, and how the queer little black Benedetto
used to crawl about the straw by her side and want everything that was
brought to her, and she always gave him a bit of what she took, and told
them if they loved her they must be good to Benedetto.

Many legends were afterwards told in that valley about the blessed Lady
who came over the sea, but they were legends by which all who heard
might know that in times gone by a woman had done beautiful loving deeds
there, rescuing those who were ready to perish.



CHAPTER SIXTY NINE.

HOMEWARD.

In those silent wintry hours when Romola lay resting from her weariness,
her mind, travelling back over the past, and gazing across the undefined
distance of the future, saw all objects from a new position.  Her
experience since the moment of her waking in the boat had come to her
with as strong an effect as that of the fresh seal on the dissolving
wax.  She had felt herself without bonds, without motive; sinking in
mere egoistic complaining that life could bring her no content; feeling
a right to say, "I am tired of life, I want to die."  That thought had
sobbed within her as she fell asleep, but from the moment after her
waking when the cry had drawn her, she had not even reflected, as she
used to do in Florence, that she was glad to live because she could
lighten sorrow--she had simply lived, with so energetic an impulse to
share the life around her, to answer the call of need and do the work
which cried aloud to be done, that the reasons for living, enduring,
labouring, never took the form of argument.

The experience was like a new baptism to Romola.  In Florence the
simpler relations of the human being to his fellow-men had been
complicated for her with all the special ties of marriage, the State,
and religious discipleship, and when these had disappointed her trust,
the shock seemed to have shaken her aloof from life and stunned her
sympathy.  But now she said, "It was mere baseness in me to desire
death.  If everything else is doubtful, this suffering that I can help
is certain; if the glory of the cross is an illusion, the sorrow is only
the truer.  While the strength is in my arm I will stretch it out to the
fainting; while the light visits my eyes they shall seek the forsaken."

And then the past arose with a fresh appeal to her.  Her work in this
green valley was done, and the emotions that were disengaged from the
people immediately around her rushed back into the old deep channels of
use and affection.  That rare possibility of self-contemplation which
comes in any complete severance from our wonted life made her judge
herself as she had never done before: the compunction which is
inseparable from a sympathetic nature keenly alive to the possible
experience of others, began to stir in her with growing force.  She
questioned the justness of her own conclusions, of her own deeds: she
had been rash, arrogant, always dissatisfied that others were not good
enough, while she herself had not been true to what her soul had once
recognised as the best.  She began to condemn her flight: after all, it
had been cowardly self-care; the grounds on which Savonarola had once
taken her back were truer, deeper than the grounds she had had for her
second flight.  How could she feel the needs of others and not feel,
above all, the needs of the nearest?

But then came reaction against such self-reproach.  The memory of her
life with Tito, of the conditions which made their real union
impossible, while their external union imposed a set of false duties on
her which were essentially the concealment and sanctioning of what her
mind revolted from, told her that flight had been her only resource.
All minds, except such as are delivered from doubt by dulness of
sensibility, must be subject to this recurring conflict where the
many-twisted conditions of life have forbidden the fulfilment of a bond.
For in strictness there is no replacing of relations: the presence of
the new does not nullify the failure and breach of the old.  Life has
lost its perfection: it has been maimed; and until the wounds are quite
scarred, conscience continually casts backward, doubting glances.

Romola shrank with dread from the renewal of her proximity to Tito, and
yet she was uneasy that she had put herself out of reach of knowing what
was his fate--uneasy that the moment might yet come when he would be in
misery and need her.  There was still a thread of pain within her,
testifying to those words of Fra Girolamo, that she could not cease to
be a wife.  Could anything utterly cease for her that had once mingled
itself with the current of her heart's blood?

Florence, and all her life there, had come back to her like hunger; her
feelings could not go wandering after the possible and the vague: their
living fibre was fed with the memory of familiar things.  And the
thought that she had divided herself from them for ever became more and
more importunate in these hours that were unfilled with action.  What if
Fra Girolamo had been wrong?  What if the life of Florence was a web of
inconsistencies?  Was she, then, something higher, that she should shake
the dust from off her feet, and say, "This world is not good enough for
me"?  If she had been really higher, she would not so easily have lost
all her trust.

Her indignant grief for her godfather had no longer complete possession
of her, and her sense of debt to Savonarola was recovering predominance.
Nothing that had come, or was to come, could do away with the fact that
there had been a great inspiration in him which had waked a new life in
her.  Who, in all her experience, could demand the same gratitude from
her as he?  His errors--might they not bring calamities?

She could not rest.  She hardly knew whether it was her strength
returning with the budding leaves that made her active again, or whether
it was her eager longing to get nearer Florence.  She did not imagine
herself daring to enter Florence, but the desire to be near enough to
learn what was happening there urged itself with a strength that
excluded all other purposes.

And one March morning the people in the valley were gathered together to
see the blessed Lady depart.  Jacopo had fetched a mule for her, and was
going with her over the mountains.  The Padre, too, was going with her
to the nearest town, that he might help her in learning the safest way
by which she might get to Pistoja.  Her store of trinkets and money,
untouched in this valley, was abundant for her needs.

If Romola had been less drawn by the longing that was taking her away,
it would have been a hard moment for her when she walked along the
village street for the last time, while the Padre and Jacopo, with the
mule, were awaiting her near the well.  Her steps were hindered by the
wailing people, who knelt and kissed her hands, then clung to her skirts
and kissed the grey folds, crying, "Ah, why will you go, when the good
season is beginning and the crops will be plentiful?  Why will you go?"

"Do not be sorry," said Romola, "you are well now, and I shall remember
you.  I must go and see if my own people want me."

"Ah, yes, if they have the pestilence!"

"Look at us again, Madonna!"

"Yes, yes, we will be good to the little Benedetto!"

At last Romola mounted her mule, but a vigorous screaming from Benedetto
as he saw her turn from him in this new position, was an excuse for all
the people to follow her and insist that he must ride on the mule's neck
to the foot of the slope.

The parting must come at last, but as Romola turned continually before
she passed out of sight, she saw the little flock lingering to catch the
last waving of her hand.



CHAPTER SEVENTY.

MEETING AGAIN.

On the fourteenth of April Romola was once more within the walls of
Florence.  Unable to rest at Pistoja, where contradictory reports
reached her about the Trial by Fire, she had gone on to Prato; and was
beginning to think that she should be drawn on to Florence in spite of
dread, when she encountered that monk of San Spirito who had been her
godfather's confessor.  From him she learned the full story of
Savonarola's arrest, and of her husband's death.  This Augustinian monk
had been in the stream of people who had followed the waggon with its
awful burthen into the Piazza, and he could tell her what was generally
known in Florence--that Tito had escaped from an assaulting mob by
leaping into the Arno, but had been murdered on the bank by an old man
who had long had an enmity against him.  But Romola understood the
catastrophe as no one else did.  Of Savonarola the monk told her, in
that tone of unfavourable prejudice which was usual in the Black
Brethren (Frati Neri) towards the brother who showed white under his
black, that he had confessed himself a deceiver of the people.

Romola paused no longer.  That evening she was in Florence, sitting in
agitated silence under the exclamations of joy and wailing, mingled with
exuberant narrative, which were poured into her ears by Monna Brigida,
who had backslided into false hair in Romola's absence, but now drew it
off again and declared she would not mind being grey, if her dear child
would stay with her.

Romola was too deeply moved by the main events which she had known
before coming to Florence, to be wrought upon by the doubtful gossiping
details added in Brigida's narrative.  The tragedy of her husband's
death, of Fra Girolamo's confession of duplicity under the coercion of
torture, left her hardly any power of apprehending minor circumstances.
All the mental activity she could exert under that load of awe-stricken
grief, was absorbed by two purposes which must supersede every other; to
try and see Savonarola, and to learn what had become of Tessa and the
children.

"Tell me, cousin," she said abruptly, when Monna Brigida's tongue had
run quite away from troubles into projects of Romola's living with her,
"has anything been seen or said since Tito's death of a young woman with
two little children?"

Brigida started, rounded her eyes, and lifted up her hands.

"Cristo! no.  What! was he so bad as that, my poor child?  Ah, then,
that was why you went away, and left me word only that you went of your
own free will.  Well, well; if I'd known that, I shouldn't have thought
you so strange and flighty.  For I did say to myself, though I didn't
tell anybody else, `What was she to go away from her husband for,
leaving him to mischief, only because they cut poor Bernardo's head off?
She's got her father's temper,' I said, `that's what it is.'  Well,
well; never scold me, child: Bardo _was_ fierce, you can't deny it.  But
if you had only told me the truth, that there was a young hussey and
children, I should have understood it all.  Anything seen or said of
her?  No; and the less the better.  They say enough of ill about him
without that.  But since that was the reason you went--"

"No, dear cousin," said Romola, interrupting her earnestly, "pray do not
talk so.  I wish above all things to find that young woman and her
children, and to take care of them.  They are quite helpless.  Say
nothing against it; that is the thing I shall do first of all."

"Well," said Monna Brigida, shrugging her shoulders and lowering her
voice with an air of puzzled discomfiture, "if that's being a Piagnone,
I've been taking peas for paternosters.  Why, Fra Girolamo said as good
as that widows ought not to marry again.  Step in at the door and it's a
sin and a shame, it seems; but come down the chimney and you're welcome.
_Two_ children--Santiddio!"

"Cousin, the poor thing has done no conscious wrong: she is ignorant of
everything.  I will tell you--but not now."

Early the next morning Romola's steps were directed to the house beyond
San Ambrogio where she had once found Tessa; but it was as she had
feared: Tessa was gone.  Romola conjectured that Tito had sent her away
beforehand to some spot where he had intended to join her, for she did
not believe that he would willingly part with those children.  It was a
painful conjecture, because, if Tessa were out of Florence, there was
hardly a chance of finding her, and Romola pictured the childish
creature waiting and waiting at some wayside spot in wondering, helpless
misery.  Those who lived near could tell her nothing except that old
deaf Lisa had gone away a week ago with her goods, but no one knew where
Tessa had gone.  Romola saw no further active search open to her; for
she had no knowledge that could serve as a starting-point for inquiry,
and not only her innate reserve but a more noble sensitiveness made her
shrink from assuming an attitude of generosity in the eyes of others by
publishing Tessa's relation to Tito, along with her own desire to find
her.  Many days passed in anxious inaction.  Even under strong
solicitation from other thoughts Romola found her heart palpitating if
she caught sight of a pair of round brown legs, or of a short woman in
the contadina dress.

She never for a moment told herself that it was heroism or exalted
charity in her to seek these beings; she needed something that she was
bound specially to care for; she yearned to clasp the children and to
make them love her.  This at least would be some sweet result, for
others as well as herself, from all her past sorrow.  It appeared there
was much property of Tito's to which she had a claim; but she distrusted
the cleanness of that money, and she had determined to make it all over
to the State, except so much as was equal to the price of her father's
library.  This would be enough for the modest support of Tessa and the
children.  But Monna Brigida threw such planning into the background by
clamorously insisting that Romola must live with her and never forsake
her till she had seen her safe in Paradise--else why had she persuaded
her to turn Piagnone?--and if Romola wanted to rear other people's
children, she, Monna Brigida, must rear them too.  Only they must be
found first.

Romola felt the full force of that innuendo.  But strong feeling
unsatisfied is never without its superstition, either of hope or
despair.  Romola's was the superstition of hope: _somehow_ she was to
find that mother and the children.  And at last another direction for
active inquiry suggested itself.  She learned that Tito had provided
horses and mules to await him in San Gallo; he was therefore going to
leave Florence by the gate of San Gallo, and she determined, though
without much confidence in the issue, to try and ascertain from the
gatekeepers if they had observed any one corresponding to the
description of Tessa with her children, to have passed the gates before
the morning of the ninth of April.  Walking along the Via San Gallo, and
looking watchfully about her through her long widow's veil, lest she
should miss any object that might aid her, she descried Bratti
chaffering with a customer.  That roaming man, she thought, might aid
her: she would not mind talking of Tessa to _him_.  But as she put aside
her veil and crossed the street towards him, she saw something hanging
from the corner of his basket which made her heart leap with a much
stronger hope.

"Bratti, my friend," she said abruptly, "where did you get that
necklace?"

"Your servant, madonna," said Bratti, looking round at her very
deliberately, his mind not being subject to surprise.  "It's a necklace
worth money, but I shall get little by it, for my heart's too tender for
a trader's; I have promised to keep it in pledge."

"Pray tell me where you got it;--from a little woman named Tessa, is it
not true?"

"Ah! if you know her," said Bratti, "and would redeem it of me at a
small profit, and give it her again, you'd be doing a charity, for she
cried at parting with it--you'd have thought she was running into a
brook.  It's a small profit I'll charge you.  You shall have it for a
florin, for I don't like to be hard-hearted."

"Where is she?" said Romola, giving him the money, and unclasping the
necklace from the basket in joyful agitation.

"Outside the gate there, at the other end of the Borgo, at old Sibilla
Manetti's: anybody will tell you which is the house."

Romola went along with winged feet, blessing that incident of the
Carnival which had made her learn by heart the appearance of this
necklace.  Soon she was at the house she sought.  The young woman and
the children were in the inner room--were to have been fetched away a
fortnight ago and more--had no money, only their clothes, to pay a poor
widow with for their food and lodging.  But since madonna knew them--
Romola waited to hear no more, but opened the door.

Tessa was seated on the low bed: her crying had passed into tearless
sobs, and she was looking with sad blank eyes at the two children, who
were playing in an opposite corner--Lillo covering his head with his
skirt and roaring at Ninna to frighten her, then peeping out again to
see how she bore it.  The door was a little behind Tessa, and she did
not turn round when it opened, thinking it was only the old woman:
expectation was no longer alive.  Romola had thrown aside her veil and
paused a moment, holding the necklace in sight.  Then she said, in that
pure voice that used to cheer her father--

"Tessa!"

Tessa started to her feet and looked round.

"See," said Romola, clasping the beads on Tessa's neck, "God has sent me
to you again."

The poor thing screamed and sobbed, and clung to the arms that fastened
the necklace.  She could not speak.  The two children came from their
corner, laid hold of their mother's skirts, and looked up with wide eyes
at Romola.

That day they all went home to Monna Brigida's, in the Borgo degli
Albizzi.  Romola had made known, to Tessa by gentle degrees, that Naldo
could never come to her again: not because he was cruel, but because he
was dead.

"But be comforted, my Tessa," said Romola.  "I am come to take care of
you always.  And we have got Lillo and Ninna."

Monna Brigida's mouth twitched in the struggle between her awe of Romola
and the desire to speak unseasonably.

"Let be, for the present," she thought; "but it seems to me a thousand
years till I tell this little contadina, who seems not to know how many
fingers she's got on her hand, who Romola is.  And I _will_ tell her
some day, else she'll never know her place.  It's all very well for
Romola;--nobody will call their souls their own when she's by; but if
I'm to have this puss-faced minx living in my house she must be humble
to me."

However, Monna Brigida wanted to give the children too many sweets for
their supper, and confessed to Romola, the last thing before going to
bed, that it would be a shame not to take care of such cherubs.

"But you must give up to me a little, Romola, about their eating, and
those things.  For you have never had a baby, and I had twins, only they
died as soon as they were born."



CHAPTER SEVENTY ONE.

THE CONFESSION.

When Romola brought home Tessa and the children, April was already near
its close, and the other great anxiety on her mind had been wrought to
its highest pitch by the publication in print of Fra Girolamo's Trial,
or rather of the confessions drawn from him by the sixteen Florentine
citizens commissioned to interrogate him.  The appearance of this
document, issued by order of the Signoria, had called forth such strong
expressions of public suspicion and discontent, that severe measures
were immediately taken for recalling it.  Of course there were copies
accidentally mislaid, and a second edition, _not_ by order of the
Signoria, was soon in the hands of eager readers.

Romola, who began to despair of ever speaking with Fra Girolamo, read
this evidence again and again, desiring to judge it by some clearer
light than the contradictory impressions that were taking the form of
assertions in the mouths of both partisans and enemies.

In the more devout followers of Savonarola his want of constancy under
torture, and his retraction of prophetic claims, had produced a
consternation too profound to be at once displaced as it ultimately was
by the suspicion, which soon grew into a positive datum, that any
reported words of his which were in inexplicable contradiction to their
faith in him, had not come from the lips of the prophet, but from the
falsifying pen of Ser Ceccone, that notary of evil repute, who had made
the digest of the examination.  But there were obvious facts that at
once threw discredit on the printed document.  Was not the list of
sixteen examiners half made up of the prophet's bitterest enemies?  Was
not the notorious Dolfo Spini one of the new Eight prematurely elected,
in order to load the dice against a man whose ruin had been determined
on by the party in power?  It was but a murder with slow formalities
that was being transacted in the Old Palace.  The Signoria had resolved
to drive a good bargain with the Pope and the Duke of Milan, by
extinguishing the man who was as great a molestation to vicious citizens
and greedy foreign tyrants as to a corrupt clergy.  The Frate had been
doomed beforehand, and the only question that was pretended to exist now
was, whether the Republic, in return for a permission to lay a tax on
ecclesiastical property, should deliver him alive into the hands of the
Pope, or whether the Pope should further concede to the Republic what
its dignity demanded--the privilege of hanging and burning its own
prophet on its own piazza.

Who, under such circumstances, would give full credit to this so-called
confession?  If the Frate had denied his prophetic gift, the denial had
only been wrenched from him by the agony of torture--agony that, in his
sensitive frame, must quickly produce raving.  What if these wicked
examiners declared that he had only had the torture of the rope and
pulley thrice, and only on one day, and that his confessions had been
made when he was under no bodily coercion--was that to be believed?  He
had been tortured much more; he had been tortured in proportion to the
distress his confessions had created in the hearts of those who loved
him.

Other friends of Savonarola, who were less ardent partisans, did not
doubt the substantial genuineness of the confession, however it might
have been coloured by the transpositions and additions of the notary;
but they argued indignantly that there was nothing which could warrant a
condemnation to death, or even to grave punishment.  It must be clear to
all impartial men that if this examination represented the only evidence
against the Frate, he would die, not for any crime, but because he had
made himself inconvenient to the Pope, to the rapacious Italian States
that wanted to dismember their Tuscan neighbour, and to those unworthy
citizens who sought to gratify their private ambition in opposition to
the common weal.

Not a shadow of political crime had been proved against him.  Not one
stain had been detected on his private conduct: his fellow-monks,
including one who had formerly been his secretary for several years, and
who, with more than the average culture of his companions, had a
disposition to criticise Fra Girolamo's rule as Prior, bore testimony,
even after the shock of his retraction, to an unimpeachable purity and
consistency in his life, which had commanded their unsuspecting
veneration.  The Pope himself had not been able to raise a charge of
heresy against the Frate, except on the ground of disobedience to a
mandate, and disregard of the sentence of excommunication.  It was
difficult to justify that breach of discipline by argument, but there
was a moral insurgence in the minds of grave men against the Court of
Rome, which tended to confound the theoretic distinction between the
Church and churchmen, and to lighten the scandal of disobedience.

Men of ordinary morality and public spirit felt that the triumph of the
Frate's enemies was really the triumph of gross licence.  And keen
Florentines like Soderini and Piero Guicciardini may well have had an
angry smile on their lips at a severity which dispensed with all law in
order to hang and burn a man in whom the seductions of a public career
had warped the strictness of his veracity; may well have remarked that
if the Frate had mixed a much deeper fraud with a zeal and ability less
inconvenient to high personages, the fraud would have been regarded as
an excellent oil for ecclesiastical and political wheels.

Nevertheless such shrewd men were forced to admit that, however poor a
figure the Florentine government made in its clumsy pretence of a
judicial warrant for what had in fact been predetermined as an act of
policy, the measures of the Pope against Savonarola were necessary
measures of self-defence.  Not to try and rid himself of a man who
wanted to stir up the Powers of Europe to summon a General Council and
depose him, would have been adding ineptitude to iniquity.  There was no
denying that towards Alexander the Sixth Savonarola was a rebel, and,
what was much more, a dangerous rebel.  Florence had heard him say, and
had well understood what he meant, that he would not _obey the devil_.
It was inevitably a life and death struggle between the Frate and the
Pope; but it was less inevitable that Florence should make itself the
Pope's executioner.

Romola's ears were filled in this way with the suggestions of a faith
still ardent under its wounds, and the suggestions of worldly
discernment, judging things according to a very moderate standard of
what is possible to human nature.  She could be satisfied with neither.
She brought to her long meditations over that printed document many
painful observations, registered more or less consciously through the
years of her discipleship, which whispered a presentiment that
Savonarola's retraction of his prophetic claims was not merely a
spasmodic effort to escape from torture.  But, on the other hand, her
soul cried out for some explanation of his lapses which would make it
still possible for her to believe that the main striving of his life had
been pure and grand.  The recent memory of the selfish discontent which
had come over her like a blighting wind along with the loss of her trust
in the man who had been for her an incarnation of the highest motives,
had produced a reaction which is known to many as a sort of faith that
has sprung up to them out of the very depths of their despair.  It was
impossible, she said now, that the negative disbelieving thoughts which
had made her soul arid of all good, could be founded in the truth of
things: impossible that it had not been a living spirit, and no hollow
pretence, which had once breathed in the Frate's words, and kindled a
new life in her.  Whatever falsehood there had been in him, had been a
fall and not a purpose; a gradual entanglement in which he struggled,
not a contrivance encouraged by success.

Looking at the printed confessions, she saw many sentences which bore
the stamp of bungling fabrication: they had that emphasis and repetition
in self-accusation which none but very low hypocrites use to their
fellow-men.  But the fact that these sentences were in striking
opposition, not only to the character of Savonarola, but also to the
general tone of the confessions, strengthened the impression that the
rest of the text represented in the main what had really fallen from his
lips.  Hardly a word was dishonourable to him except what turned on his
prophetic annunciations.  He was unvarying in his statement of the ends
he had pursued for Florence, the Church, and the world; and, apart from
the mixture of falsity in that claim to special inspiration by which he
sought to gain hold of men's minds, there was no admission of having
used unworthy means.  Even in this confession, and without expurgation
of the notary's malign phrases, Fra Girolamo shone forth as a man who
had sought his own glory indeed, but sought it by labouring for the very
highest end--the moral welfare of men--not by vague exhortations, but by
striving to turn beliefs into energies that would work in all the
details of life.

"Everything that I have done," said one memorable passage, which may
perhaps have had its erasures and interpolations, "I have done with the
design of being for ever famous in the present and in future ages; and
that I might win credit in Florence; and that nothing of great import
should be done without my sanction.  And when I had thus established my
position in Florence, I had it in my mind to do great things in Italy
and beyond Italy, by means of those chief personages with whom I had
contracted friendship and consulted on high matters, such as this of the
General Council.  And in proportion as my first efforts succeeded, I
should have adopted further measures.  Above all, when the General
Council had once been brought about, I intended to rouse the princes of
Christendom, and especially those beyond the borders of Italy, to subdue
the infidels.  It was not much in my thoughts to get myself made a
Cardinal or Pope, for when I should have achieved the work I had in
view, I should, without being Pope, have been the first man in the world
in the authority I should have possessed, and the reverence that would
have been paid me.  If I had been made Pope, I would not have refused
the office: but it seemed to me that to be the head of that work was a
greater thing than to be Pope, because a man without virtue may be Pope;
but _such a work as I contemplated demanded a man of excellent
virtues_."

That blending of ambition with belief in the supremacy of goodness made
no new tone to Romola, who had been used to hear it in the voice that
rang through the Duomo.  It was the habit of Savonarola's mind to
conceive great things, and to feel that he was the man to do them.
Iniquity should be brought low; the cause of justice, purity, and love
should triumph; and it should triumph by his voice, by his work, by his
blood.  In moments of ecstatic contemplation, doubtless, the sense of
self melted in the sense of the Unspeakable, and in that part of his
experience lay the elements of genuine self-abasement; but in the
presence of his fellow-men for whom he was to act, pre-eminence seemed a
necessary condition of his life.

And perhaps this confession, even when it described a doubleness that
was conscious and deliberate, really implied no more than that wavering
of belief concerning his own impressions and motives which most human
beings who have not a stupid inflexibility of self-confidence must be
liable to under a marked change of external conditions.  In a life where
the experience was so tumultuously mixed as it must have been in the
Prate's, what a possibility was opened for a change of self-judgment,
when, instead of eyes that venerated and knees that knelt, instead of a
great work on its way to accomplishment, and in its prosperity stamping
the agent as a chosen instrument, there came the hooting and the
spitting and the curses of the crowd; and then the hard faces of enemies
made judges; and then the horrible torture, and with the torture the
irrepressible cry, "It is true, what you would have me say: let me go:
do not torture me again: yes, yes, I am guilty.  O God!  Thy stroke has
reached me!"

As Romola thought of the anguish that must have followed the
confession--whether, in the subsequent solitude of the prison,
conscience retracted or confirmed the self-taxing words--that anguish
seemed to be pressing on her own heart and urging the slow bitter tears.
Every vulgar self-ignorant person in Florence was glibly pronouncing on
this man's demerits, while _he_ was knowing a depth of sorrow which can
only be known to the soul that has loved and sought the most perfect
thing, and beholds itself fallen.

She had not then seen--what she saw afterwards--the evidence of the
Frate's mental state after he had had thus to lay his mouth in the dust.
As the days went by, the reports of new unpublished examinations,
eliciting no change of confessions, ceased; Savonarola was left alone in
his prison and allowed pen and ink for a while, that, if he liked, he
might use his poor bruised and strained right arm to write with.  He
wrote; but what he wrote was no vindication of his innocence, no protest
against the proceedings used towards him: it was a continued colloquy
with that divine purity with which he sought complete reunion; it was
the outpouring of self-abasement; it was one long cry for inward
renovation.  No lingering echoes of the old vehement self-assertion,
"Look at my work, for it is good, and those who set their faces against
it are the children of the devil!"  The voice of Sadness tells him, "God
placed thee in the midst of the people even as if thou hadst been one of
the excellent.  In this way thou hast taught others, and hast failed to
learn thyself.  Thou hast cured others: and thou thyself hast been still
diseased.  Thy heart was lifted up at the beauty of thy own deeds, and
through this thou hast lost thy wisdom and art become, and shalt be to
all eternity, nothing...  After so many benefits with which God has
honoured thee, thou art fallen into the depths of the sea; and after so
many gifts bestowed on thee, thou, by thy pride and vainglory, hast
scandalised all the world."  And when Hope speaks and argues that the
divine love has not forsaken him, it says nothing now of a great work to
be done, but only says, "Thou art not forsaken, else why is thy heart
bowed in penitence?  That too is a gift."

There is no jot of worthy evidence that from the time of his
imprisonment to the supreme moment, Savonarola thought or spoke of
himself as a martyr.  The idea of martyrdom had been to him a passion
dividing the dream of the future with the triumph of beholding his work
achieved.  And now, in place of both, had come a resignation which he
called by no glorifying name.

_But therefore he may the more fitly be called a martyr by his
fellow-men to all time_.  For power rose against him not because of his
sins, but because of his greatness--not because he sought to deceive the
world, but because he sought to make it noble.  And through that
greatness of his he endured a double agony: not only the reviling, and
the torture, and the death-throe, but the agony of sinking from the
vision of glorious achievement into that deep shadow where he could only
say, "I count as nothing: darkness encompasses me: yet the light I saw
was the true light."



CHAPTER SEVENTY TWO.

THE LAST SILENCE.

Romola had seemed to hear, as if they had been a cry, the words repeated
to her by many lips--the words uttered by Savonarola when he took leave
of those brethren of San Marco who had come to witness his signature of
the confession: "Pray for me, for God has withdrawn from me the spirit
of prophecy."

Those words had shaken her with new doubts as to the mode in which he
looked back at the past in moments of complete self-possession.  And the
doubts were strengthened by more piteous things still, which soon
reached her ears.

The nineteenth of May had come, and by that day's sunshine there had
entered into Florence the two Papal Commissaries, charged with the
completion of Savonarola's trial.  They entered amid the acclamations of
the people, calling for the death of the Frate.  For now the popular cry
was, "It is the Frate's deception that has brought on all our
misfortunes; let him be burned, and all things right will be done, and
our evils will cease."

The next day it is well certified that there was fresh and fresh torture
of the shattered sensitive frame; and now, at the first sight of the
horrible implements, Savonarola, in convulsed agitation, fell on his
knees, and in brief passionate words _retracted his confession_,
declared that he had spoken falsely in denying his prophetic gift, and
that if he suffered, he would suffer for the truth--"The things that I
have spoken, I had them from God."

But not the less the torture was laid upon him, and when he was under it
he was asked why he had uttered those retracting words.  Men were not
demons in those days, and yet nothing but concessions of guilt were held
a reason for release from torture.  The answer came: "I said it that I
might seem good; tear me no more, I will tell you the truth."

There were Florentine assessors at this new trial, and those words of
twofold retraction had soon spread.  They filled Romola with dismayed
uncertainty.

"But,"--it flashed across her--"there will come a moment when he may
speak.  When there is no dread hanging over him but the dread of
falsehood, when they have brought him into the presence of death, when
he is lifted above the people, and looks on them for the last time, they
cannot hinder him from speaking a last decisive word.  I will be there."

Three days after, on the 23rd of May 1498, there was again a long narrow
platform stretching across the great piazza, from the Palazzo Vecchio
towards the Tetta de' Pisani.  But there was no grove of fuel as before:
instead of that, there was one great heap of fuel placed on the circular
area which made the termination of the long narrow platform.  And above
this heap of fuel rose a gibbet with three halters on it; a gibbet
which, having two arms, still looked so much like a cross as to make
some beholders uncomfortable, though one arm had been truncated to avoid
the resemblance.

On the marble terrace of the Palazzo were three tribunals; one near the
door for the Bishop, who was to perform the ceremony of degradation on
Fra Girolamo and the two brethren who were to suffer as his followers
and accomplices; another for the Papal Commissaries, who were to
pronounce them heretics and schismatics, and deliver them over to the
secular arm; and a third, close to Marzocco, at the corner of the
terrace where the platform began, for the Gonfaloniere, and the Eight
who were to pronounce the sentence of death.

Again the Piazza was thronged with expectant faces: again there was to
be a great fire kindled.  In the majority of the crowd that pressed
around the gibbet the expectation was that of ferocious hatred, or of
mere hard curiosity to behold a barbarous sight.  But there were still
many spectators on the wide pavement, on the roofs, and at the windows,
who, in the midst of their bitter grief and their own endurance of
insult as hypocritical Piagnoni, were not without a lingering hope, even
at this eleventh hour, that God would interpose, by some sign, to
manifest their beloved prophet as His servant.  And there were yet more
who looked forward with trembling eagerness, as Romola did, to that
final moment when Savonarola might say, "O people, I was innocent of
deceit."

Romola was at a window on the north side of the Piazza, far away from
the marble terrace where the tribunals stood; and near her, also looking
on in painful doubt concerning the man who had won his early reverence,
was a young Florentine of two-and-twenty, named Jacopo Nardi, afterwards
to deserve honour as one of the very few who, feeling Fra Girolamo's
eminence, have written about him with the simple desire to be veracious.
He had said to Romola, with respectful gentleness, when he saw the
struggle in her between her shuddering horror of the scene and her
yearning to witness what might happen in the last moment--

"Madonna, there is no need for you to look at these cruel things.  I
will tell you when he comes out of the Palazzo.  Trust to me; I know
what you would see."

Romola covered her face, but the hootings that seemed to make the
hideous scene still visible could not be shut out.  At last her arm was
touched, and she heard the words, "He comes."  She looked towards the
Palace, and could see Savonarola led out in his Dominican garb; could
see him standing before the Bishop, and being stripped of the black
mantle, the white scapulary and long white tunic, till he stood in a
close woollen under-tunic, that told of no sacred office, no rank.  He
had been degraded, and cut off from the Church Militant.

The baser part of the multitude delight in degradations, apart from any
hatred; it is the satire they best understand.  There was a fresh hoot
of triumph as the three degraded brethren passed on to the tribunal of
the Papal Commissaries, who were to pronounce them schismatics and
heretics.  Did not the prophet look like a schismatic and heretic now?
It is easy to believe in the damnable state of a man who stands stripped
and degraded.

Then the third tribunal was passed--that of the Florentine officials who
were to pronounce sentence, and amongst whom, even at her distance,
Romola could discern the odious figure of Dolfo Spini, indued in the
grave black lucco, as one of the Eight.

Then the three figures, in their close white raiment, trod their way
along the platform, amidst yells and grating tones of insult.

"Cover your eyes, Madonna," said Jacopo Nardi; "Fra Girolamo will be the
last."

It was not long before she had to uncover them again.  Savonarola was
there.  He was not far off her now.  He had mounted the steps; she could
see him look round on the multitude.

But in the same moment expectation died, and she only saw what he was
seeing--torches waving to kindle the fuel beneath his dead body, faces
glaring with a yet worse light; she only heard what _he_ was hearing--
gross jests, taunts, and curses.

The moment was past.  Her face was covered again, and she only knew that
Savonarola's voice had passed into eternal silence.



EPILOGUE.

On the evening of the 22nd of May 1509, five persons, of whose history
we have known something, were seated in a handsome upper room opening on
to a loggia which, at its right-hand corner, looked all along the Borgo
Pinti, and over the city gate towards Fiesole and the solemn heights
beyond it.

At one end of the room was an archway opening into a narrow inner room,
hardly more than a recess, where the light fell from above on a small
altar covered with fair white linen.  Over the altar was a picture,
discernible at the distance where the little party sat only as the small
full-length portrait of a Dominican Brother.  For it was shaded from the
light above by overhanging branches and wreaths of flowers, and the
fresh tapers below it were unlit.  But it seemed that the decoration of
the altar and its recess was not complete.  For part of the floor was
strewn with a confusion of flowers and green boughs, and among them sat
a delicate blue-eyed girl of thirteen, tossing her long light-brown hair
out of her eyes, as she made selections for the wreaths she was weaving,
or looked up at her mother's work in the same kind, and told her how to
do it with a little air of instruction.

For that mother was not very clever at weaving flowers or at any other
work.  Tessa's fingers had not become more adroit with the years--only
very much fatter.  She got on slowly and turned her head about a good
deal, and asked Ninna's opinion with much deference; for Tessa never
ceased to be astonished at the wisdom of her children.  She still wore
her contadina gown: it was only broader than the old one; and there was
the silver pin in her rough curly brown hair, and round her neck the
memorable necklace, with a red cord under it, that ended mysteriously in
her bosom.  Her rounded face wore even a more perfect look of childish
content than in her younger days: everybody was so good in the world,
Tessa thought; even Monna Brigida never found fault with her now, and
did little else than sleep, which was an amiable practice in everybody,
and one that Tessa liked for herself.

Monna Brigida was asleep at this moment, in a straight-backed arm-chair,
a couple of yards off.  Her hair, parting backward under her black hood,
had that soft whiteness which is not like snow or anything else, but is
simply the lovely whiteness of aged hair.  Her chin had sunk on her
bosom, and her hands rested on the elbow of her chair.  She had not been
weaving flowers or doing anything else: she had only been looking on as
usual, and as usual had fallen asleep.

The other two figures were seated farther off, at the wide doorway that
opened on to the loggia.  Lillo sat on the ground with his back against
the angle of the door-post, and his long legs stretched out, while he
held a large book open on his knee, and occasionally made a dash with
his hand at an inquisitive fly, with an air of interest stronger than
that excited by the finely-printed copy of Petrarch which he kept open
at one place, as if he were learning something by heart.

Romola sat nearly opposite Lillo, but she was not observing him.  Her
hands were crossed on her lap and her eyes were fixed absently on the
distant mountains: she was evidently unconscious of anything around her.
An eager life had left its marks upon her: the finely-moulded cheek had
sunk a little, the golden crown was less massive; but there was a
placidity in Romola's face which had never belonged to it in youth.  It
is but once that we can know our worst sorrows, and Romola had known
them while life was new.

Absorbed in this way, she was not at first aware that Lillo had ceased
to look at his book, and was watching her with a slightly impatient air,
which meant that he wanted to talk to her, but was not quite sure
whether she would like that entertainment just now.  But persevering
looks make themselves felt at last.  Romola did presently turn away her
eyes from the distance and met Lillo's impatient dark gaze with a
brighter and brighter smile.  He shuffled along the floor, still keeping
the book on his lap, till he got close to her and lodged his chin on her
knee.

"What is it, Lillo?" said Romola, pulling his hair back from his brow.
Lillo was a handsome lad, but his features were turning out to be more
massive and less regular than his father's.  The blood of the Tuscan
peasant was in his veins.

"Mamma.  Romola, what am I to be?" he said, well contented that there
was a prospect of talking till it would be too late to con "Spirto
gentil" any longer.

"What should you like to be, Lillo?  You might be a scholar.  My father
was a scholar, you know, and taught me a great deal.  That is the reason
why I can teach you."

"Yes," said Lillo, rather hesitatingly.  "But he is old and blind in the
picture.  Did he get a great deal of glory?"

"Not much, Lillo.  The world was not always very kind to him, and he saw
meaner men than himself put into higher places, because they could
flatter and say what was false.  And then his dear son thought it right
to leave him and become a monk; and after that, my father, being blind
and lonely, felt unable to do the things that would have made his
learning of greater use to men, so that he might still have lived in his
works after he was in his grave."

"I should not like that sort of life," said Lillo.  "I should like to be
something that would make me a great man, and very happy besides--
something that would not hinder me from having a good deal of pleasure."

"That is not easy, my Lillo.  It is only a poor sort of happiness that
could ever come by caring very much about our own narrow pleasures.  We
can only have the highest happiness, such as goes along with being a
great man, by having wide thoughts, and much feeling for the rest of the
world as well as ourselves; and this sort of happiness often brings so
much pain with it, that we can only tell it from pain by its being what
we would choose before everything else, because our souls see it is
good.  There are so many things wrong and difficult in the world, that
no man can be great--he can hardly keep himself from wickedness--unless
he gives up thinking much about pleasure or rewards, and gets strength
to endure what is hard and painful.  My father had the greatness that
belongs to integrity; he chose poverty and obscurity rather than
falsehood.  And there was Fra Girolamo--you know why I keep to-morrow
sacred: _he_ had the greatness which belongs to a life spent in
struggling against powerful wrong, and in trying to raise men to the
highest deeds they are capable of.  And so, my Lillo, if you mean to act
nobly and seek to know the best things God has put within reach of men,
you must learn to fix your mind on that end, and not on what will happen
to you because of it.  And remember, if you were to choose something
lower, and make it the rule of your life to seek your own pleasure and
escape from what is disagreeable, calamity might come just the same; and
it would be calamity falling on a base mind, which, is the one form of
sorrow that has no balm in it, and that may well make a man say,--`It
would have been better for me if I had never been born,' I will tell you
something, Lillo."

Romola paused for a moment.  She had taken Lillo's cheeks between her
hands, and his young eyes were meeting hers.

"There was a man to whom I was very near, so that I could see a great
deal of his life, who made almost every one fond of him, for he was
young, and clever, and beautiful, and his manners to all were gentle and
kind, I believe, when I first knew him, he never thought of anything
cruel or base.  But because he tried to slip away from everything that
was unpleasant, and cared for nothing else so much as his own safety, he
came at last to commit some of the basest deeds--such as make men
infamous.  He denied his father, and left him to misery; he betrayed
every trust that was reposed in him, that he might keep himself safe and
get rich and prosperous.  Yet calamity overtook him."

Again Romola paused.  Her voice was unsteady, and Lillo was looking up
at her with awed wonder.

"Another time, my Lillo--I will tell you another time.  See, there are
our old Piero di Cosimo and Nello coming up the Borgo Pinti, bringing us
their flowers.  Let us go and wave our hands to them, that they may know
we see them."

"How queer old Piero is!" said Lillo as they stood at the corner of the
loggia, watching the advancing figures.  "He abuses you for dressing the
altar, and thinking so much of Fra Girolamo, and yet he brings you the
flowers."

"Never mind," said Romola.  "There are many good people who did not love
Fra Girolamo.  Perhaps I should never have learned to love him if he had
not helped me when I was in great need."
